Desi Arnaz

Desi Arnaz (born Desiderio Alberto Arnaz y de Acha III) (March 2, 1917 December 2, 1986) was a Cuban American musician, actor and television producer.

Desi Arnaz was born on March 2, 1917 in Santiago de Cuba, Cuba to Desiderio Alberto Arnaz (1894-1973) and Dolores de Acha (1896-1988). His father was Santiago's youngest mayor and then served in the Cuban House of Representatives. The 1933 revolution, led by Fulgencio Batista, overthrew the American-backed President Gerardo Machado, landed his father in jail for six months, and stripped his family of its wealth and power. Arnaz's father was released when U.S. officials, who believed him to be neutral during the revolt, intervened on his behalf. Arnaz and his parents then fled to Miami, Florida.

In 1939, he starred on Broadway in the successful musical Too Many Girls. He then went to Hollywood to appear in the 1940 movie version at RKO, which starred actress, comedienne, and his future wife Lucille Ball. At the time, he also played guitar for Xavier Cugat 

Arnaz appeared in several movies in the 1940s, most notably Bataan (1943). Shortly after he received his draft notice, but before he was actually inducted, he injured his knee. Although he made it through boot camp, he was eventually classified for limited service, and ended up directing United Service Organization (U.S.O.) programs at a military hospital in the San Fernando Valley. In his memoirs, he recalled discovering that the first thing soldiers requested was almost invariably a glass of cold milk, so he arranged for beautiful starlets to greet the wounded soldiers as they disembarked and pour milk for them. After leaving the Army, he formed another orchestra, which was successful in live appearances and recordings. After he became engaged in television, he kept the orchestra on his payroll throughout the period he remained an active producer.

On October 15, 1951, Desi produced and starred in I Love Lucy in which he played a fictitious version of himself, Cuban orchestra leader Enrique "Ricky" Ricardo. His co-star was his real-life wife, Lucille Ball, who played Ricky's wife, Lucy. Television executives had been pursuing Ball to adapt her very popular radio series My Favorite Husband for television. Ball insisted on Arnaz playing her on-air spouse so the two would be able to spend more time together. The original premise was for the couple to portray Lucy and Larry Lopez, a successful show business couple (he a band leader, she an actress) whose glamorous careers interfered with their efforts to maintain a normal marriage. Market research indicated, however, that this scenario would not be popular, so Arnaz changed it to make Ricky a struggling young orchestra leader and Lucy an ordinary housewife who had show business fantasies but no talent. Desi would often appear at, and later own, the Tropicana Club which, under his ownership, he renamed Club Babalu. Initially, the idea of having Ball and the distinctly Latino Arnaz portray a married couple encountered resistance as they were told that Desi's Cuban accent and Latin style would not be agreeable to American viewers. The couple overcame these objections, however, by touring together in a live vaudeville act they developed with the help of Spanish clown Pepito Prez, together with Ball's radio show writers. Much of the material from their vaudeville act was used in the original "I Love Lucy" pilot, including Lucy's memorable seal routine. (The pilot originally ran as the sixth episode of the show's first season.)

With Ball, he founded Desilu Productions. At this time, most television programs were broadcast live and, as the largest markets were in New York, the rest of the country received only kinescope images. Karl Freund, Arnaz's cameraman, developed the multiple-camera setup production style using adjacent sets that became the standard for all subsequent situation comedies to this day. The use of film enabled every station around the country to broadcast high-quality images of the show. Arnaz was told that it would be impossible to allow an audience onto a sound stage, but he worked with Freund to design a set that would accommodate an audience, allow filming, and also adhere to fire and safety codes.

Network executives considered the use of film an unnecessary extravagance. Arnaz convinced them to allow Desilu to cover all additional costs associated with the filming process, under the stipulation that Desilu owned and controlled all rights to the film. Arnaz's unprecedented arrangement is widely considered to be one of the shrewdest deals in television history. As a result of his foresight, Desilu reaped the profits from all reruns of the series.

Arnaz also pushed the network to allow them to show Lucille Ball while she was pregnant. According to Arnaz, the CBS network told him, "You cannot show a pregnant woman on television." Arnaz consulted a priest, a rabbi, and a minister, all of whom told him that there would be nothing wrong with showing a pregnant Lucy or with using the word pregnant. The network finally relented and let Arnaz and Ball weave the pregnancy into the story line, but remained adamant about eschewing use of pregnant, so Arnaz substituted expecting, pronouncing it  'spectin'  in his Cuban accent. Oddly, the official title of the episode announcing the pregnancy was "Lucy Is Enceinte," employing the French word for pregnant.

In addition to I Love Lucy, he produced December Bride, The Mothers-in-Law, The Lucy Show, Those Whiting Girls, Our Miss Brooks, The Danny Thomas Show, The Andy Griffith Show, and The Untouchables, Star Trek TOS all Top shows in their time, and the 1956 feature film Forever, Darling, in which he and Ball starred. His foresight in filming and retaining post-broadcast ownership of shows had a huge impact on the future of television syndication (reruns).

Arnaz and Ball avoided ethnic jokes. Arnaz recalled that the only exception consisted of making fun of Ricky Ricardo's accent, and noted that even these jokes worked only when Lucy, as his wife, did the mimicking.

Arnaz was patriotic; in his memoirs, the first object of thanks is the United States itself: "I know of no other country in the world", he wrote, in which "a sixteen-year-old kid, broke and unable to speak the language" could reach the success he had. Over the show's six-year run, the fortunes of the Ricardos mirror that of the archetypal 1950s American Dream: At first, they live in a tiny brownstone apartment; Ricky's fortunes continue to improve, and they move into a slightly larger one with a view after Little Ricky is born. Later, Ricky gets his big break and goes to Hollywood; shortly after returning to New York, all of them have the chance to travel through Europe. Finally, Lucy and Ricky head for a house in the wealthy Connecticut country.

Arnaz married Lucille Ball on November 30, 1940, and she initiated divorce proceedings in 1944, but returned to him before the interlocutory decree became final. He and Ball are the parents of actress Lucie Arnaz (born 1951) and actor Desi Arnaz, Jr. (born 1953).

Arnaz's marriage with Ball began to collapse under the strain of his serious problems with alcohol, drugs, and womanizing. According to his memoir, the combined pressures of managing the production company as well as supervising its day-to-day operations had greatly worsened as it grew much larger. Arnaz was also suffering from diverticulitis. He and Ball divorced in 1960; she was 48 and he was 43. When Ball returned to weekly television, she and Arnaz worked out an agreement regarding Desilu, wherein she bought him out.

Arnaz married his second wife, Edith Mack Hirsch, on March 2, 1963, and greatly reduced his show business activities. He served as executive producer of The Mothers-in-Law, and during its two-year run, made four guest appearances as a Spanish matador, Seor Delgado. He was widowed in 1985, when his wife Edith died.

Although Arnaz remarried after his divorce from Ball in 1960, they remained friends. Family home movies later aired on television showed Ball and Arnaz playing together with their grandson, Simon (or "Simn", if Arnaz's mock protests are to be believed), shortly before Arnaz's death.

In the 1970s, Arnaz co-hosted a week of shows with daytime TV host/producer Mike Douglas. Vivian Vance appeared as a guest. Arnaz also headlined a Kraft Music Hall special on NBC that featured his two children, with a brief appearance by Vance. To promote his autobiography, A Book, Arnaz, on February 21, 1976, served as a guest host on Saturday Night Live, with his son, Desi, Jr., also appearing. The program contained spoofs of I Love Lucy and The Untouchables. He also read Lewis Carroll's poem "Jabberwocky" in a heavy Cuban accent (he pronounced it "Habberwocky"). Arnaz, Jr. played the drums and, supported by the SNL band, Desi sang both "Babalu" and another favorite from his dance band days, "Cuban Pete"; the arrangements similar to the ones used on I Love Lucy. He ended the broadcast by leading the entire cast in a raucous conga line through the SNL studio.

Arnaz and his wife eventually moved to Del Mar, California, where he lived the rest of his life in semi-retirement. He owned a 45-acre (18 ha) horse breeding farm in Corona, California, and raced thoroughbreds. He contributed to charitable and non-profit organizations, including San Diego State University. Arnaz would make a guest appearance on the TV series Alice, starring Linda Lavin and produced by I Love Lucy co-creators Madelyn Pugh (Madelyn Davis) and Bob Carroll, Jr.

Arnaz, a lifelong smoker, was diagnosed with lung cancer in early 1986. He died several months later on December 2, 1986, at age 69. Two days earlier, on what would have been his and Lucille's 46th wedding anniversary (November 30), she telephoned him. They shared a few words, mostly "I love you's." She said "All right, honey. I'll talk to you later." She was, in fact, the last person to ever speak with Desi Arnaz. His death came just five days before Lucille Ball received the Kennedy Center Honors.

Desi was survived by his mother, Dolores, who died in 1988 at the age of 94.

Desi Arnaz has two stars on the Hollywood Walk of Fame: one at 6327 Hollywood Boulevard for contributions to motion pictures, and one at 6220 Hollywood Boulevard for television. There is a Lucille Ball-Desi Arnaz Center museum in Jamestown, New York (birthplace of Lucille Ball) and a Desi Arnaz Bandshell in Lucille Ball Memorial Park in Celoron, New York (childhood home of Lucille Ball).









Boris Yeltsin

Boris Nikolayevich Yeltsin (; ) (1 February 1931 23 April 2007) was the first President of the Russian Federation, serving from 1991 to 1999.

Yeltsin came to power with a wave of high expectations. On 12 June 1991 he was elected president of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic with 57% of the vote, becoming the first popularly elected president. But Yeltsin never recovered his popularity after a series of economic and political crises in Russia in the 1990s. The Yeltsin era was marked by widespread corruption, economic collapse, and enormous political and social problems. By the time he left office, Yeltsin had an approval rating of two percent by some estimates.

Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union in December 1991, Yeltsin, vowing to transform Russia's socialist command economy into a free market economy, endorsed price liberalization and privatization programs. Due to corruption and other factors, a good deal of the national wealth fell into the hands of a relatively small group of people. 

In August 1991, Yeltsin won international plaudits for casting himself as a democrat and defying the August coup attempt of 1991 by the members of Soviet government opposed to perestroika. He left office widely unpopular with the Russian population as an ineffectual and ailing autocrat. He either acted as his own prime minister (until June 1992) or appointed men of his choice, regardless of parliament. His confrontations with parliament climaxed in the October 1993 Russian constitutional crisis, when Yeltsin called up tanks to shell the Russian White House, blasting out his opponents in parliament. Later in 1993, Yeltsin imposed a new constitution with strong presidential powers, which was approved by referendum in December.

Just hours before the first day of 2000, Yeltsin made a surprise announcement of his resignation, leaving the presidency in the hands of Vladimir Putin.

Boris Yeltsin was born in the village of Butka, in Talitsky District of Sverdlovsk Oblast, Russia. His father, Nikolay Yeltsin, was convicted of anti-Soviet agitation in 1934 and sentenced to hard labour in a gulag for three years. Following his release he remained unemployed for a period of time and then worked in construction. His mother, Klavdiya Vasilyevna Yeltsina, worked as a seamstress. 

Boris Yeltsin studied at Pushkin High School in Berezniki in Perm Krai. He was fond of sports (in particular skiing, gymnastics, volleyball, track and field, boxing and wrestling) despite losing the thumb and index finger of his left hand when he and some friends sneaked into a Red Army supply depot, stole several grenades, and tried to dissect them.

Yeltsin received his higher education at the Ural State Technical University in Sverdlovsk, majoring in construction, and graduated in 1955. The subject of his degree paper was "Television Tower".

From 1955 to 1957 he worked as a foreman with the building trust Uraltyazhtrubstroy and from 1957 to 1963 he worked in Sverdlovsk, and was promoted from construction site superintendent to chief of the Construction Directorate with the Yuzhgorstroy Trust. In 1963 he became chief engineer, and in 1965 head of the Sverdlovsk House-Building Combine, responsible for sewerage and technical plumbing. He joined the ranks of the CPSU nomenklatura in 1968 when he was appointed head of construction with the Sverdlovsk Regional Party Committee. In 1975 he became secretary of the regional committee in charge of the region's industrial development. In 1976 the Politburo of the CPSU promoted him to the post of the first secretary of the CPSU Committee of Sverdlovsk Oblast (effectively he became the head of one of the most important industrial regions in the USSR), he remained in this position till 1985.

Yeltsin was a member of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) from 1961 to July 1990, and began working in the Communist administration in 1968. He later commented on his communist views:

In 1977 as party boss in Sverdlovsk, Yeltsin—on orders from Moscow—ordered the destruction of the Ipatiev House where the last Russian tsar had been killed by Bolshevik troops. The Ipatiev House was demolished in one night, 27 July 1977. Also during Yeltsin's stay in Sverdlovsk, a CPSU palace was built which was named "White Tooth" by the residents.. During this time, Yeltsin developed connections with key people in the Soviet power structure.

He was appointed to the Politburo, and was also "Mayor" of Moscow (First Secretary of the CPSU Moscow City Committee) from 24 December 1985 to 1987. He was promoted to these high rank positions by Mikhail Gorbachev and Yegor Ligachev, who presumed that Yeltsin would be their man. Yeltsin was also given a country house (dacha) previously occupied by Gorbachev. During this period Yeltsin portrayed himself as a reformer and populist (for example, he took a trolleybus to work), firing and reshuffling his staff several times. His initiatives became popular among Moscow residents.

In 1987, after a confrontation with hardliner Yegor Ligachev and Mikhail Gorbachev about Gorbachev's wife, Raisa, meddling in affairs of the state, Yeltsin was sacked from his high ranking party positions. On 21 October 1987 at the plenary meeting of the Central Committee of the CPSU, Yeltsin, without prior approval from Gorbachev, lashed out at the Politburo. He expressed his discontent with both the slow pace of reform in society and the servility shown to the General Secretary, then asked to resign from the Politburo, adding that the City Committee would decide whether he should resign from the post of first secretary of the Moscow City Party Committee. In his reply, Gorbachev accused Yeltsin of "political immaturity" and "absolute irresponsibility", and at the plenary meeting of the Moscow City Party Committee proposed relieving Yeltsin of his post of first secretary. Nobody backed Yeltsin. Criticism of Yeltsin continued on 11 November 1987 at the meeting of the Moscow City Party Committee. After Yeltsin admitted that his speech had been a mistake, he was fired from the post of first secretary of the Moscow City Committee. He was demoted to the position of first deputy commissioner for the State Committee for Construction. After being fired, Yeltsin was hospitalized and later (confirmed by Nikolai Ryzhkov) attempted suicide. He was perturbed and humiliated but began plotting his revenge. His opportunity came with Gorbachev's establishment of the Congress of People's Deputies. He recovered, and started intensively criticizing Gorbachev, highlighting the slow pace of reform in the Soviet Union as his major argument.

Yeltsin's criticism of the Politburo and Gorbachev led to a smear campaign against him, in which examples of Yeltsin's awkward behavior were used against him. An article published in Pravda described him as being drunk at a lecture during his visit to the United States, an allegation which appeared to be confirmed by a TV account of his speech. However, popular dissatisfaction with the regime was very strong, and these attempts to smear Yeltsin only added to his popularity. In another incident, Yeltsin fell from a bridge. Commenting on this event, Yeltsin hinted that he was helped to fall from the bridge by the enemies of perestroika, but his opponents suggested that he was simply drunk.



In March 1989, Yeltsin was elected to the Congress of People's Deputies as the delegate from Moscow district and gained a seat on the Supreme Soviet. 

On 29 May 1990, he was elected chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Russian SFSR (RSFSR), the post he held until 10 July 1991. He was supported by both democratic and conservative members of the Supreme Soviet, which sought power in the developing political situation in the country. A part of this power struggle was the opposition between power structures of the Soviet Union and the RSFSR. In an attempt to gain more power, on 12 June 1990, the Congress of People's Deputies of the RSFSR adopted a declaration of sovereignty and Yeltsin quit the CPSU in July 1990.

On 12 June 1991, Yeltsin won 57% of the popular vote in the democratic presidential elections for the Russian republic, defeating Gorbachev's preferred candidate, Nikolai Ryzhkov. In his election campaign, Yeltsin criticized the "dictatorship of the center", but did not suggest the introduction of a market economy. Instead, he said that he would put his head on the railtrack in the event of increased prices. Yeltsin took office on 10 July.

On 18 August 1991, a coup against Gorbachev was launched by the government members opposed to perestroika headed by Vladimir Kryuchkov. Gorbachev was held in Crimea while Yeltsin raced to the White House of Russia (residence of the Supreme Soviet of the RSFSR) in Moscow to defy the coup. The White House was surrounded by the military but the troops defected in the face of mass popular demonstrations. Yeltsin responded to the coup by making a memorable speech from the turret of a tank. By 21 August most of the coup leaders had fled Moscow and Gorbachev was "rescued" from Crimea and then returned to Moscow. Yeltsin was subsequently hailed by his supporters around the world for rallying mass opposition to the coup.

Although restored to his position, Gorbachev's powers were now fatally compromised. Neither union nor Russian power structures heeded his commands as support had swung over to Yeltsin. Through the fall of 1991, the Russian government took over the union government, ministry by ministry. 

On 6 November 1991, Yeltsin issued a decree banning the Communist Party throughout the RSFSR.

In early December 1991, Ukraine voted for independence from the Soviet Union. A week later, on 8 December, Yeltsin met with Ukrainian president Leonid Kravchuk and the leader of Belarus, Stanislav Shushkevich, in Belovezhskaya Pushcha, where the three presidents announced the dissolution of the Soviet Union and that they would establish a voluntary Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) in its place. According to Mikhail Gorbachev, the president of the Soviet Union at that time, Yeltsin kept the plans of the Belovezhskaya meeting in strict secrecy and the main goal of the dissolution of the Soviet Union was to get rid of Gorbachev, who by that time had started to recover his position after the events of August. Mikhail Gorbachev has also accused Yeltsin of violating the people's will expressed in the referendum in which the majority voted to keep the Soviet Union.

On 24 December, the Russian Federation took the Soviet Union's seat in the United Nations. The next day, President Gorbachev resigned and the Soviet Union ceased to exist, thereby ending the world's largest and most influential socialist state. Economic relations between the former Soviet republics were severely compromised. Millions of ethnic Russians found themselves in the newly formed foreign countries.

Just days after the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Boris Yeltsin resolved to embark on a program of radical economic reform, with the aim of restructuring Russia's economic systemconverting the world's largest command economy into a free-market one. During early discussions of this transition, Yeltsin's advisers debated issues of speed and sequencing, with an apparent division between those favoring a rapid approach and those favoring a gradual or slower approach.

In late 1991 Yeltsin turned to the advice of Western economists, and Western institutions such as the IMF, the World Bank, and the U.S. Treasury Department, who had developed a standard policy recipe for transition economies in the late 1980s. This policy recipe came to be known as the "Washington Consensus" or "shock therapy", a combination of measures intended to liberalize prices and stabilize the state's budget. Such measures had been attempted in Poland, and advocates of "shock therapy" felt the same could be done in Russia. Some Russian policymakers were skeptical that this was the way to go, but the approach was favored by Yeltsin's deputy, Yegor Gaidar, a 35-year-old Russian economist inclined toward radical reform.

On 2 January 1992, Yeltsin, acting as his own prime minister, ordered the liberalization of foreign trade, prices, and currency. At the same time, Yeltsin followed a policy of 'macroeconomic stabilization,' a harsh austerity regime designed to control inflation. Under Yeltsin's stabilization program, interest rates were raised to extremely high levels to tighten money and restrict credit. To bring state spending and revenues into balance, Yeltsin raised new taxes heavily, cut back sharply on government subsidies to industry and construction, and made steep cuts to state welfare spending.

In early 1992, prices skyrocketed throughout Russia, and deep credit crunch shut down many industries and brought about a protracted depression. The reforms devastated the living standards of much of the population, especially the groups dependent on Soviet-era state subsidies and welfare entitlement programs. Through the 1990s, Russia's GDP fell by 50 percent, vast sectors of the economy were wiped out, inequality and unemployment grew dramatically, while incomes fell. Hyperinflation, caused by the Central Bank of Russia's loose monetary policy, wiped out a lot of personal savings, and tens of millions of Russians were plunged into poverty.

Some economists argue that in the 1990s Russia suffered an economic downturn more severe than the United States or Germany had undergone six decades earlier in the Great Depression. Russian commentators and even some Western economists, such as Marshall Goldman, widely blamed Yeltsin's Western-backed economic program for the country's disastrous economic performance in the 1990s. Many politicians began to quickly distance themselves from the program. In February 1992, Russia's vice president, Alexander Rutskoy denounced the Yeltsin program as "economic genocide." By 1993 conflict over the reform direction escalated between Yeltsin on the one side, and the opposition to radical economic reform in Russia's parliament on the other.

Also throughout 1992, Yeltsin wrestled with the Supreme Soviet and the Congress of People's Deputies for control over government, government policy, government banking and property. In the course of 1992, the speaker of the Russian Supreme Soviet, Ruslan Khasbulatov, came out in opposition to the reforms, despite claiming to support Yeltsin's overall goals. In December 1992, the 7th Congress of People's Deputies succeeded in turning down the Yeltsin-backed candidacy of Yegor Gaidar for the position of Russian prime minister. Eventually, on 14 December, Viktor Chernomyrdin, seen as a compromise figure, was confirmed in the office.

The conflict escalated on 20 March 1993 when Yeltsin, in a televised address to the nation, announced that he was going to assume certain "special powers" in order to implement his program of reforms. In response, the hastily-called 9th Congress of People's Deputies attempted to remove Yeltsin from presidency through impeachment on 26 March 1993. Yeltsin's opponents gathered more than 600 votes for impeachment, but fell 72 votes short of the required two-thirds majority. On 21 September 1993 Yeltsin announced in a televised address his decision to disband the Supreme Soviet and Congress of People's Deputies by decree.

In his address Yeltsin declared his intent to rule by decree until the election of the new parliament and a referendum on a new constitution, triggering the constitutional crisis of October 1993. On the night after Yeltsin's televised address, the Supreme Soviet declared Yeltsin removed from presidency, by virtue of his breaching the constitution, and Vice-President Alexander Rutskoy was sworn in as the acting president.

Between 2124 September Yeltsin was confronted by significant popular unrest, encouraging the defenders of the parliament. Moscow saw what amounted to a spontaneous mass uprising of anti-Yeltsin demonstrators numbering in the tens of thousands marching in the streets resolutely seeking to aid forces defending the parliament building. The demonstrators were protesting the new and terrible living conditions under Yeltsin. Since 1989 GDP had declined by half. Corruption was rampant, violent crime was skyrocketing, medical services were collapsing, food and fuel were increasingly scarce and life expectancy was falling for all but a tiny handful of the population; moreover, Yeltsin was increasingly getting the blame.

By early October, Yeltsin had secured the support of Russia's army and ministry of interior forces. In a massive show of force, Yeltsin called up tanks to shell the Russian White House, Russia's parliament building, blasting out his opponents. As a result, hundreds died and thousands were wounded. 

As Supreme Soviet was dissolved, in December 1993 elections to the newly established parliament, the State Duma, were held. Candidates associated with Yeltsin's economic policies were overwhelmed by a huge anti-Yeltsin vote, the bulk of which was divided between the Communist Party and ultra-nationalists. The referendum, however, held at the same time, approved the new constitution, which significantly expanded the powers of the president, giving Yeltsin a right to appoint the members of the government, to dismiss the prime minister and, in some cases, to dissolve the Duma.



In December 1994, Yeltsin ordered the military invasion of Chechnya in an attempt to restore Moscow's control over the separatist republic. Nearly two years later Yeltsin withdrew federal forces from the devastated Chechnya under a 1996 peace agreement brokered by Alexander Lebed, then Yeltsin's security chief. The peace deal allowed Chechnya greater autonomy but not full independence.

The decision to launch the war in Chechnya dismayed many in the West. TIME magazine wrote: "Then, what was to be made of Boris Yeltsin? Clearly he could no longer be regarded as the democratic hero of Western myth. But had he become an old- style communist boss, turning his back on the democratic reformers he once championed and throwing in his lot with militarists and ultranationalists? Or was he a befuddled, out-of-touch chief being manipulated, knowingly or unwittingly, by well, by whom exactly? If there was to be a dictatorial coup, would Yeltsin be its victim or its leader?"



Following the collapse of the Soviet Union, Yeltsin promoted privatization as a way of spreading ownership of shares in former state enterprises as widely as possible to create political support for his economic reforms. In the West, privatization was viewed as the key to the transition from communism in Eastern Europe, ensuring a quick dismantling of the Soviet-era command economy to make way for 'free market reforms.' In the early 1990s, Anatoly Chubais, Yeltsin's deputy for economic policy, emerged as a leading advocate of privatization in Russia.

In late 1992, Yeltsin launched a program of free vouchers as a way to give mass privatization a jump-start. Under the program, all Russian citizens were issued vouchers, each with a nominal value of around 10,000 rubles, for purchase of shares of select state enterprises. Although each citizen initially received a voucher of equal face value, within months most of them converged in the hands of intermediaries who were ready to buy them for cash right away.

In 1995, as Yeltsin struggled to finance Russia's growing foreign debt and gain support from the Russian business elite for his bid in the spring 1996 presidential elections, the Russian president prepared for a new wave of privatization offering stock shares in some of Russia's most valuable state enterprises in exchange for bank loans. The program was promoted as a way of simultaneously speeding up privatization and ensuring the government a much-needed infusion of cash for its operating needs.

However, the deals were effectively giveaways of valuable state assets to a small group of tycoons in finance, industry, energy, telecommunications, and the media who came to be known as "oligarchs" in the mid-1990s. By summer 1996, substantial ownership shares over major firms were acquired at very low prices by a handful of people. Boris Berezovsky, who controlled major stakes in several banks and the national media, emerged as one of Yeltsin's most prominent backers. Along with Berezovsky, Mikhail Khodorkovsky, Vladimir Potanin, Vladimir Bogdanov, Rem Viakhirev, Vagit Alekperov, Alexander Smolensky, Victor Vekselberg, Mikhail Fridman and a few years later Roman Abramovich, were habitually mentioned in the media as Russia's oligarchs.

On 5 December 1991, Senator Jesse Helms, ranking member of the Minority Staff of the U.S. Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, wrote to Boris Yeltsin concerning U.S. servicemen who were POWs or MIAs. "The status of thousands and thousands of American servicemen who are held by Soviet and other Communist forces, and who were never repatriated after every major war this century, is of grave concern to the American people." 

Yeltsin would ultimately respond with a statement made on 15 June 1992, while being interviewed aboard his presidential jet on his way to the United States, "Our archives have shown that it is true some of them were transferred to the territory of the U.S.S.R. and were kept in labor camps... We can only surmise that some of them may still be alive." On 10 December 1991, just five days after Senator Helms had written Yeltsin concerning American servicemen, he again wrote to Yeltsin, this time concerning KAL 007. 

"One of the greatest tragedies of the Cold War was the shoot-down of the Korean Airlines Flight 007 by the Armed Forces of what was then the Soviet Union on 1 September 1983... The KAL-007 tragedy was one of the most tense incidences of the entire Cold War. However, now that relations between our two nations have improved substantially, I believe that it is time to resolve the mysteries surrounding this event. 

Clearing the air on this issue could help further to improve relations." In March of 1992, Yeltsin would hand over KAL 007's Black Box without its tapes to Korean President Roh Tae-Woo at the end of the plenary session of the Korean National Assembly with this statement, "We apologize for the tragedy and are trying to settle some unsolved issues."

Yeltsin would ultimately respond on 8 January 1992 by handing over to the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) of the United Nations what the Russians had for so many years denied possessing: the tapes of the KAL 007's "Black Box" (its Digital Flight Data Recorder and Cockpit Voice Recorder). 

The openness of Yeltsin about POW/MIA and KAL 007 matters may also have signaled his willingness for more openness to the West. In 1992, which he labelled the "window of opportunity", he was willing to discuss biological weapons with the U.S. but never admitted that the Sverdlovsk anthrax leak of 2 April 1979 had been caused as a result of a mishap at a military facility. The Russian government has maintained that the cause was contaminated meat. The true number of victims in the anthrax outbreak at Sverdlovsk, about  east of Moscow, is not known.

In February 1996, Yeltsin announced that he would seek a second term in the spring 1996 Russian presidential election. The announcement followed weeks of speculation that Yeltsin was at the end of his political career because of his health problems and growing unpopularity in Russia. At the time Yeltsin was recuperating from a series of heart attacks. Domestic and international observers also noted his occasionally erratic behaviour. When campaigning opened at the beginning of 1996, Yeltsin's popularity was close to zero. Meanwhile, the opposition Communist Party of the Russian Federation had already gained ground in parliamentary voting on 17 December 1995, and its candidate, Gennady Zyuganov, had a strong grass roots organization, especially in the rural areas and small towns, and appealed effectively to memories of the old days of Soviet prestige on the international stage and the socialist domestic order.

Panic struck the Yeltsin team when opinion polls suggested that the ailing president could not win; some members of his entourage urged him to cancel presidential elections and effectively rule as dictator from then on. Instead, Yeltsin changed his campaign team, assigning a key role to his daughter, Tatyana Dyachenko, and appointing Chubais as campaign manager. Chubais, acting as both Yeltsin's campaign manager and adviser on Russia's privatisation programme, used his control of the privatisation programme as an instrument of Yeltsin's reelection campaign.

In the spring of 1996, Chubais and Yeltsin recruited a team of a handful of financial and media oligarchs to bankroll the Yeltsin campaign and guaranteed favorable media coverage the president on national television and in leading newspapers. In return, Chubais allowed well-connected Russian business leaders to acquire majority stakes in some of Russia's most valuable state-owned assets. The media painted a picture of a fateful choice for Russia, between Yeltsin and a "return to totalitarianism." The oligarchs even played up the threat of civil war if a Communist were elected president.Yeltsin campaigned energetically, dispelling concerns about his health, and maintained a high media profile. To boost his popularity, Yeltsin promised to abandon some his more unpopular economic reforms, boost welfare spending, end the war in Chechnya, and pay wage and pension arrears. Yeltsin's campaign also got a boost from the announcement of a $10 billion loan to the Russian government from the International Monetary Fund.

Zyuganov, who lacked Yeltsin's resources and financial backing, saw his strong initial lead whittle away. After the first round on 16 June Yeltsin appointed a highly popular candidate Alexander Lebed, who came in third in the first round, Secretary of the Security Council of Russia, sacked at the latter's behest defence minister Pavel Grachev and on 20 June sacked a number of his siloviki, one of them being his chief of presidential security Alexander Korzhakov, viewed by many as Yeltsin's minence grise.

In the run-off on 3 July, with a turnout of 68.9%, Yeltsin won 53.8% of the vote and Zyuganov 40.3%, with the rest (5.9%) voting "against all".

In his second term, Yeltsin was unable to follow through on most of his campaign promises, except for ending the Chechen war, which was halted for most of the period.



In July 1996, Yeltsin was re-elected as president with financial support from influential business oligarchs who owed their wealth to their connections with Yeltsin's administration. Despite only gaining 35% of the first round vote in the 1996 elections, Yeltsin defeated his communist rival Gennady Zyuganov with 54% in the runoff election. Later that year, Yeltsin underwent an emergency quintuple heart bypass surgery and remained in the hospital for months.

During Yeltsin's presidency, Russia received US$ 40 billion in funds from the IMF and other international lending organizations. However, his opponents allege that most of these funds were stolen by people from Yeltsin's circle and placed in foreign banks.

In 1998, a political and economic crisis emerged when Yeltsin's government defaulted on its debts, causing financial markets to panic and the ruble to collapse in the 1998 financial crisis.

During the 1999 Kosovo war, Yeltsin strongly opposed the NATO military campaign against Yugoslavia, and warned of possible Russian intervention if NATO deployed ground troops to Kosovo. In televised comments he stated: "I told NATO, the Americans, the Germans: Don't push us toward military action. Otherwise there will be a European war for sure and possibly world war."

On 15 May 1999, Yeltsin survived another attempt of impeachment, this time by the democratic and communist opposition in the State Duma. He was charged with several unconstitutional activities, including the signing of the Belavezha Accords, dissolving the Soviet Union in December 1991, the coup-d'tat in October 1993, and initiating the war in Chechnya in 1994. None of these charges received the two-thirds majority of the Duma which was required to initiate the process of impeachment of the president.

On 9 August 1999 Yeltsin fired his prime minister, Sergei Stepashin, and for the fourth time, fired his entire cabinet. In Stepashin's place he appointed Vladimir Putin, relatively unknown at that time, and announced his wish to see Putin as his successor.

In late 1999 Yeltsin and President Clinton openly disagreed on the war in Chechnya. At the November meeting of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, Clinton pointed his finger at Yeltsin and demanded he halt bombing attacks that had resulted in many civilian casualties. Yeltsin immediately left the conference.

In December while visiting China to seek support on Chechnya, Yeltsin replied to Clintons criticism of a Russian ultimatum to citizens of Grozney. He bluntly pronounced: "Yesterday, Clinton permitted himself to put pressure on Russia. It seems he has for a minute, for a second, for half a minute, forgotten that Russia has a full arsenal of nuclear weapons. He has forgotten about that." Clinton dismissed Yeltsin's comments stating: "I didn't think he'd forgotten that America was a great power when he disagreed with what I did in Kosovo." It fell to Vladimir Putin to downplay Yeltsin's comments and present reassurances about U.S. and Russian relations.

On 31 December 1999, in a surprise announcement aired at 12:00 noon on Russian television and taped in the morning of the same day, Yeltsin said he had resigned and Prime Minister Vladimir Putin had taken over as acting president, with elections due to take place on 26 March 2000. Yeltsin asked for forgiveness for what he acknowledged were errors of his rule, and said Russia needed to enter the new century with new political leaders. Yeltsin said: "I want to beg forgiveness for your dreams that never came true. And also I would like to beg forgiveness not to have justified your hopes."

According to numerous reports, Yeltsin struggled with alcoholism. The subject made headlines abroad during Yeltsin's visit to the U.S. in 1989 for a series of lectures on social and political life in the Soviet Union. That trip was described by a report in the Italian newspaper La Repubblica. The article reported that Yeltsin often appeared drunk in public. The article was reprinted by Pravda. Yeltsin's alleged alcoholism was also the subject of media discussion following his meeting with U.S. Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott following Clinton's inauguration in 1993 and after his flight stop-over at Shannon Airport, Ireland in September 1994 when the waiting Irish Taoiseach (prime minister) Albert Reynolds was told that Yeltsin was unwell and would not be leaving the aircraft.

According to former Deputy Prime Minister of Russia Boris Nemtsov, the bizarre behavior of Yeltsin resulted from "strong drugs" given to him by Kremlin's doctors, which were incompatible even with a small amount of alcohol. This was discussed by journalist Yelena Tregubova from the "Kremlin's pool" in connection with an episode during Yeltsin's visit to Stockholm in 1997 when Yeltsin suddenly started talking nonsense (he allegedly told his bemused audience that Swedish meatballs reminded him of Bjrn Borg's face), lost his balance, and almost fell down on the podium after drinking a single glass of Champagne Yeltsin, in his memoirs, claimed no recollection of the event but did however make a passing reference to the incident when he met Borg a year later at The World Circle Kabaddi Cup in Hamilton, Ontario, where the pair had been invited to present the trophy. Similarly, Yeltsin made a hasty withdrawal from the funeral of Hussein of Jordan in February 1999. (Russian: . ., M., Ad Marginem, 2003 ISBN 5-93321-073-0 Full text in Russian. German translation. 

After Yeltsin's death, a Dutch neurosurgeon revealed that his team was secretly flown to Moscow to operate on Yeltsin in 1999. Yeltsin suffered from an unspecified neurological disorder that affected his sense of balance, causing him to wobble as if in a drunken state; the goal of the operation was to reduce the pain.

Yeltsin's personal and health problems received a great deal of attention in the global press. As the years went on, he was often viewed as an increasingly unstable leader, rather than the inspiring figure he was once seen as. The possibility that he might die in office was often discussed.Starting in the last years of his presidential term, Yeltsin's primary residence was the Gorki-9 presidential dacha west of Moscow. He made frequent stays at the nearby government sanatorium in Barvikha.

Yeltsin maintained a low profile after his resignation, making almost no public statements or appearances. However, on 13 September 2004, following the Beslan school hostage crisis and nearly-concurrent terrorist attacks in Moscow, Putin launched an initiative to replace the election of regional governors with a system whereby they would be directly appointed by the president and approved by regional legislatures. Yeltsin, together with Mikhail Gorbachev, publicly criticized Putin's plan as a step away from democracy in Russia and a return to the centrally-run political apparatus of the Soviet era.

In September 2005, Yeltsin underwent a hip operation in Moscow after breaking his femur in a fall while vacationing on the Italian island of Sardinia.

On 1 February 2006, Yeltsin celebrated his 75th birthday. He used this occasion as an opportunity to criticize a "monopolistic" U.S. foreign policy, and to state that Vladimir Putin was the right choice for Russia. He also disputed accusations of corruption.

Yeltsin also used his retirement to pursue his considerable love of tennis. He was a frequent fixture at tournaments held in Russia, notably Russian Davis Cup and Federation Cup team events. Far from a passive supporter like many VIPs who attend sports events, Yeltsin gained a reputation as an animated fan, cheering and jumping in support of the Russians. When the Russian men won the Davis Cup in 2002 and 2006 Yeltsin descended the stands to celebrate with the players, group hugging the team.

Following his death in April 2007, his widow, Naina, attended in Yeltsin's place the final of that year's Federation Cup, in which Russia's women comprehensively beat Italy.

Boris Yeltsin died of congestive heart failure on 23 April 2007 at the age of 76. According to experts quoted by Komsomolskaya Pravda, the onset of Yeltsin's condition was due to his visit to Jordan between 25 March and 2 April. He was buried in the Novodevichy Cemetery on 25 April 2007, following a period during which his body had lain in state in the Cathedral of Christ the Saviour in Moscow. Yeltsin was the first Russian statesman in 113 years to be buried in a church ceremony, after Emperor Alexander III. He was also the first leader in Russian and Soviet history to die quietly in retirement having overseen a peaceful transfer to his successor, Lenin being forced to retire by illness and Khrushchev being ousted in a coup. 

President Putin declared the day of his funeral a national day of mourning, with flags flown at half-staff and all entertainment programs suspended for the day. 

Yeltsin is survived by his wife, Naina Iosifovna Yeltsina, whom he married in 1956, and their two daughters Yelena and Tatyana, born in 1957 and 1959 respectively.

Yeltsin's "presidency has inscribed him forever in Russian and in world history." ... "A new democratic Russia was born during his time: a free, open and peaceful country. A state in which the power truly does belong to the people." ... "the first President of Russias strength consisted in the mass support of Russian citizens for his ideas and aspirations. Thanks to the will and direct initiative of President Boris Yeltsin a new constitution, one which declared human rights a supreme value, was adopted. It gave people the opportunity to freely express their thoughts, to freely choose power in Russia, to realise their creative and entrepreneurial plans. This Constitution permitted us to begin building a truly effective Federation." ... "We knew (Yeltsin) as a brave and a warm-hearted, spiritual person. He was an upstanding and courageous national leader. And he was always very honest and frank while defending his position." ... "(Yeltsin) assumed full responsibility for everything he called for, for everything he aspired to. For everything he tried to do and did do for the sake of Russia, for the sake of millions of Russians. And he invariably took upon himself, let it in his heart, all the trials and tribulations of Russia, peoples difficulties and problems."Shortly after the news broke, former Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev issued a statement, saying:"I offer my deepest condolences to the family of a man on whose shoulders rested many great deeds for the good of the country and serious mistakesa tragic fate".











Cary Elwes

Ivan Simon Cary Elwes (born October 26, 1962) is an English actor credited as Cary Elwes, known for his performances in Another Country, The Princess Bride, , Hot Shots!, Glory, Liar, Liar and Saw.

Elwes was born in London. His advertising agent father Dominic Elwes and grandfather Simon Elwes were very well-known British portrait painters. His father had moved in the circles of high society (and been friends with Lord Lucan and Lady Annabel Goldsmith to whom he was also related) before he committed suicide in 1975. His mother, interior designer and shipping heiress Tessa Georgina Kennedy, is of Croatian and Anglo-Irish descent; she eloped with his father in 1958 at age nineteen to great scandal. Elwes's mother later re-married to Hollywood executive, Elliott Kastner, from whom he has a half-sister, Milica Kastner and half-brother Dillon Kastner.

Elwes descends from a devoutly Roman Catholic recusant family on his father's side (originally known as the "Cary-Elwes" family, but now many branches of the family are now simply known as "Elwes") which includes noted British monks and bishops, such as Abbott Columba Cary-Elwes, Archbishop Dudley Cary-Elwes and Father Luke Cary-Elwes. He himself was an altar boy at the Brompton Oratory. He is also said to be distantly related to Guilford Dudley, whom he played in the movie Lady Jane. 

Elwes attended West Acre House at Harrow School in England, and Sarah Lawrence College in Yonkers, New York, where he studied, among other acting-related subjects, German Expressionist Film.

Elwes has also appeared on television. In 1996, he played a bit part as "David Libner" on the hit show Seinfeld, opposite Debra Messing. In 1998, he played Astronaut Michael Collins in the Golden Globe Award-winning HBO miniseries From the Earth To the Moon. In 1999, he guest starred as Dr. John York in the Ripper episode of the television series The Outer Limits. He earned two Golden Satellite Award nominations for his performances in the television films The Pentagon Wars and Uprising. He had a recurring role in the final season (2001-2002) of The X-Files as FBI Assistant Director Brad Follmer. Chris Carter, creator of the X-Files, wrote the character especially for him. In 2004, he received great praise with his portrayal of serial killer Ted Bundy in the A&E Network film The Riverman, which was based on the book The Riverman: Ted Bundy and I Hunt for the Green River Killer written by Robert D. Keppel. The Riverman became one of the highest rated original movies in the networks history and garnered a prestigious BANFF Rockie Award nomination. In 2005 he again received critical acclaim, internationally, with his portrayal of the young, pre-Pope John Paul II in the CBS made-for-TV movie epic Pope John Paul II. This epic was highly successful not only in North America, but also in Europe, where it broke box office records in the late pope's native Poland and became the first film ever to break $1 million (GBP588,200) in three days. 

His voice-over works include the narrator in James Patterson's audio book The Jester as well as characters in film and television animations such as Quest for Camelot, Hercules, Batman Beyond, and the English versions of the Japanese films Porco Rosso, Whisper of the Heart, and The Cat Returns. For the 2004 video game The Bard's Tale, he served as scriptwriter, improviser, and voice actor of the main character The Bard.

He has also performed in the Bob Balaban-directed off-Broadway dramatic stage play The Exonerated in New York during the March 18-23, 2003 week run. 

In August 2005, he filed a lawsuit against his management firm and the producers of Saw. He alleged that he was promised "a minimum of one percent of the producers' net profits" and did not receive the full amount as promised. 

Elwes has volunteered as an actor with the Young Storytellers Program. 

He made an uncredited appearance as Lester Persky the man who introduced Andy Warhol to Edie Sedgwick in the 2006 film Factory Girl. In 2007, he made a guest appearance on .

Elwes and Lisa Marie Kurbikoff met in 1991 at a Malibu chili cook-off. He became engaged to Kurbikoff in 1997 in Paris and they wed in 2000. Elwes has two brothers, Cassian and Damian, and a half-sister Milica, who are all involved in the entertainment industry. He has been active in fighting for the rights of Native Americans.

Lisa Marie Elwes gave birth to the couple's daughter, Dominique, born on April 24, 2007 at 10:41 p.m. at Cedars Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles. She weighed 7 lbs., 2 oz.







Abraham Lincoln

Abraham Lincoln (February 12, 1809 – April 15, 1865), the sixteenth President of the United States, successfully led his country through its greatest internal crisis, the American Civil War, only to be assassinated as the war was coming to an end. Before becoming the first Republican elected to the Presidency, Lincoln was a lawyer, an Illinois state legislator, a member of the United States House of Representatives, and an unsuccessful candidate for election to the Senate.

As an outspoken opponent of the expansion of slavery in the United States, Lincoln won the Republican Party nomination in 1860 and was elected president later that year. During his time in office, he contributed to the effort to preserve the United States by leading the defeat of the secessionist Confederate States of America in the American Civil War. He introduced measures that resulted in the abolition of slavery, issuing his Emancipation Proclamation in 1863 and promoting the passage of the Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution, which passed Congress before Lincoln's death and was ratified by the states later in 1865.

Lincoln closely supervised the victorious war effort, especially the selection of top generals, including Ulysses S. Grant. Historians have concluded that he handled the factions of the Republican Party well, bringing leaders of each faction into his cabinet and forcing them to cooperate. Lincoln successfully defused a war scare with the United Kingdom in 1861. Under his leadership, the Union took control of the border slave states at the start of the war. Additionally, he managed his own reelection in the 1864 presidential election.

Opponents of the war (also known as "Copperheads") criticized Lincoln for refusing to compromise on the slavery issue. Conversely, the Radical Republicans, an abolitionist faction of the Republican Party, criticized him for moving too slowly in abolishing slavery. Even with these road blocks, Lincoln successfully rallied public opinion through his rhetoric and speeches; his Gettysburg Address is but one example of this. At the close of the war, Lincoln held a moderate view of Reconstruction, seeking to speedily reunite the nation through a policy of generous reconciliation. His assassination in 1865 was the first presidential assassination in U.S. history and made him a martyr for the ideal of national unity.



Abraham Lincoln was born on February 12, 1809, to Thomas Lincoln and Nancy Hanks, two uneducated farmers, in a one-room log cabin on the  Sinking Spring Farm, in southeast Hardin County, Kentucky (now part of LaRue County), making him the first president born outside the original Thirteen Colonies. Lincoln's ancestor Samuel Lincoln had arrived in Hingham, Massachusetts in the 17th century, but his descendants had gradually moved west, from Pennsylvania to Virginia and then westward to the frontier.

For some time, Thomas Lincoln, Abraham's father, was a respected and relatively affluent citizen of the Kentucky backcountry. He had purchased the Sinking Spring Farm in December 1808 for $200 cash and assumption of a debt. The family belonged to a Hardshell Baptist church, although Abraham himself never joined their church, or any other church for that matter.

In 1816, the Lincoln family was forced to make a new start in Perry County (now in Spencer County), Indiana. He later noted that this move was "partly on account of slavery," and partly because of difficulties with land deeds in Kentucky: Unlike land in the Northwest Territory, Kentucky never had a proper U.S. survey, and farmers often had difficulties proving title to their property.

When Lincoln was nine, his mother, then 34 years old, died of milk sickness. Soon afterwards, his father remarried to Sarah Bush Johnston. Lincoln was affectionate toward his stepmother, whom he would call "Mother" for the rest of his life, but he was distant from his father.

In 1830, after more economic and land-title difficulties in Indiana, the family settled on public land in Macon County, Illinois. The following winter was desolate and especially brutal, and the family considered moving back to Indiana. The following year, when his father relocated the family to a new homestead in Coles County, Illinois, 22-year-old Lincoln struck out on his own, canoeing down the Sangamon River to the village of New Salem in Sangamon County. Later that year, hired by New Salem businessman Denton Offutt and accompanied by friends, he took goods from New Salem to New Orleans via flatboat on the Sangamon, Illinois and Mississippi rivers.

Lincoln's formal education consisted of about 18 months of schooling, but he was largely self-educated and an avid reader. He was also a talented local wrestler and skilled with an axe. Lincoln avoided hunting and fishing because he did not like killing animals, even for food. At 6 foot 4 inches (1.93 m), he was unusually tall, as well as strong.

Lincoln began his political career in 1832, at age 23, with an unsuccessful campaign for the Illinois General Assembly, as a member of the Whig Party. The centerpiece of his platform was the undertaking of navigational improvements on the Sangamon River. He believed that this would attract steamboat traffic, which would allow the sparsely populated, poorer areas along the river to flourish.

He was elected captain of an Illinois militia company drawn from New Salem during the Black Hawk War, and later wrote that he had not had "any such success in life which gave him so much satisfaction."

For several months, Lincoln ran a small store in New Salem. In 1834, he won election to the state legislature, and, after coming across the Commentaries on the Laws of England, began to teach himself law. Admitted to the bar in 1837, he moved to Springfield, Illinois, that same year and began to practice law with John T. Stuart. With a reputation as a formidable adversary during cross-examinations and in his closing arguments, Lincoln became an able and successful lawyer.

He served four successive terms in the Illinois House of Representatives as a representative from Sangamon County, and became a leader of the Illinois Whig party. In 1837, he made his first protest against slavery in the Illinois House, stating that the institution was "founded on both injustice and bad policy." It was also in this same year that Lincoln met Joshua Fry Speed, who would become a close friend.

Lincoln wrote a series of anonymous letters, published in 1842 in the Sangamon Journal, mocking State Auditor and prominent Democrat James Shields. Two years later, Lincoln entered law practice with William Herndon, a fellow Whig. In 1854, both men joined the fledgling Republican Party. Following Lincoln's death, Herndon began collecting stories about Lincoln and published them in Herndon's Lincoln.



On November 4, 1842 Lincoln married Mary Todd, daughter of a prominent slave-owning family from Kentucky. The couple had four sons. Robert Todd Lincoln was born in Springfield, Illinois on August 1, 1843. Their only child to survive into adulthood, young Robert attended Phillips Exeter Academy and Harvard College.

The other Lincoln children were born in Springfield, Illinois, and died either during childhood or their teen years. Edward Baker Lincoln was born on March 10, 1846, and died on February 1, 1850, also in Springfield. William "Willie" Wallace Lincoln was born on December 21, 1850, and died on February 20, 1862 in Washington, D.C., during President Lincoln's first term. Thomas "Tad" Lincoln was born on April 4, 1853, and died on July 16, 1871 in Chicago.

A Whig and an admirer of party leader Henry Clay, Lincoln was elected to a term in the U.S. House of Representatives in 1846. As a freshman House member, he was not a particularly powerful or influential figure. However, he spoke out against the Mexican-American War, which he attributed to President Polk's desire for "military glory" and challenged the President's claims regarding the Texas boundary and offered Spot Resolutions, demanding to know on what "spot" on US soil that blood was first spilt.

Lincoln later damaged his political reputation with a speech in which he declared, "God of Heaven has forgotten to defend the weak and innocent, and permitted the strong band of murderers and demons from hell to kill men, women, and children, and lay waste and pillage the land of the just." Two weeks later, President Polk sent a peace treaty to Congress. While no one in Washington paid any attention to Lincoln, the Democrats orchestrated angry outbursts from across his district, where the war was popular and many had volunteered.

Warned by his law partner, William Herndon, that the damage was mounting and irreparable, Lincoln decided not to run for reelection. His statements were not easily forgotten, and would haunt him during the Civil War. These statements were also held against him when he applied for a position in the new Taylor administration. Instead, Taylor's people offered Lincoln various positions in the remote Oregon Territory, primarily the governorship. Acceptance of this offer would have ended his career in the rapidly growing state of Illinois, so Lincoln declined the position. Returning to Springfield, Lincoln gave up politics for several years and turned his energies to his law practice.

By the mid-1850s, Lincoln's caseload focused largely on the competing transportation interests of river barges and railroads. In one prominent 1851 case, he represented the Alton & Sangamon Railroad in a dispute with a shareholder, James A. Barret. Barret had refused to pay the balance on his pledge to the railroad on the grounds that it had changed its originally planned route. Lincoln argued that as a matter of law a corporation is not bound by its original charter when that charter can be amended in the public interest, that the newer route proposed by Alton & Sangamon was superior and less expensive, and that accordingly, the corporation had a right to sue Barret for his delinquent payment. He won this case, and the decision by the Illinois Supreme Court was eventually cited by several other courts throughout the United States.

The civil case which won Lincoln fame as a lawyer was the landmark Hurd v. Rock Island Bridge Company. America's expansion west, which Lincoln strongly supported, was seen as an economic threat to the river trade, which ran north-to-south, primarily on the Mississippi river. In 1856 a steamboat collided with a bridge, built by the Rock Island Railroad, between Rock Island, Illinois, and Davenport, Iowa, the first railroad bridge to span the Mississippi. The steamboat owner sued for damages, claiming the bridge was a hazard to navigation. Lincoln argued in court for the railroad and won, removing a costly impediment to western expansion by establishing the right of land routes to bridge waterways.

Possibly the most notable criminal trial of Lincoln's career as a lawyer came in 1858, when he defended William "Duff" Armstrong, who had been charged with murder. The case became famous for Lincoln's use of judicial notice a rare tactic at that time to show that an eyewitness had lied on the stand. After the witness testified to having seen the crime by moonlight, Lincoln produced a Farmers' Almanac to show that the moon on that date was at such a low angle that it could not have provided enough illumination to see anything clearly. Based almost entirely on this evidence, Armstrong was acquitted.

Lincoln was involved in more than 5,100 cases in Illinois alone during his 23-year legal career. Though many of these cases involved little more than filing a writ, others were more substantial and quite involved. Lincoln and his partners appeared before the Illinois State Supreme Court more than 400 times.

Lincoln returned to politics in response to the Kansas-Nebraska Act (1854), which expressly repealed the limits on slavery's extent as determined by the Missouri Compromise (1820). Illinois Democrat Stephen A. Douglas, the most powerful man in the Senate, proposed popular sovereignty as the solution to the slavery impasse, and incorporated it into the Kansas–Nebraska Act. Douglas argued that in a democracy the people should have the right to decide whether or not to allow slavery in their territory, rather than have such a decision imposed on them by Congress.

In the October 16, 1854, "Peoria Speech", Lincoln first stood out among the other free soil orators of the day:



Drawing on remnants of the old Whig, Free Soil, Liberty and Democratic parties, he was instrumental in forming the new Republican Party. In a stirring campaign, the Republicans carried Illinois in 1854 and elected a senator. Lincoln was the obvious choice, but to keep the new party balanced he allowed the election to go to an ex-Democrat Lyman Trumbull. At the Republican convention in 1856, Lincoln placed second in the contest to become the party's candidate for Vice-President.

In 1857-58, Douglas broke with President Buchanan, leading to a fight for control of the Democratic Party. Some eastern Republicans even favored the reelection of Douglas in 1858, since he had led the opposition to the Lecompton Constitution, which would have admitted Kansas as a slave state. Accepting the Republican nomination for Senate in 1858, Lincoln delivered his famous speech: "'A house divided against itself cannot stand.'(Mark 3:25) I believe this government cannot endure permanently half slave and half free. I do not expect the Union to be dissolved I do not expect the house to fall but I do expect it will cease to be divided. It will become all one thing, or all the other." The speech created an evocative image of the danger of disunion caused by the slavery debate, and rallied Republicans across the north.

The 1858 campaign featured the Lincoln-Douglas debates, a famous contest on slavery. Lincoln warned that "The Slave Power" was threatening the values of republicanism, while Douglas emphasized the supremacy of democracy, as set forth in his Freeport Doctrine, which said that local settlers should be free to choose whether to allow slavery or not. Though the Republican legislative candidates won more popular votes, the Democrats won more seats, and the legislature reelected Douglas to the Senate. Nevertheless, Lincoln's speeches on the issue transformed him into a national political star.

Lincoln was chosen as the Republican candidate for the 1860 election for several reasons. His expressed views on slavery were seen as more moderate than those of rivals William H. Seward and Salmon P. Chase. His "Western" origins also appealed to the newer states: other contenders, especially those with more governmental experience, had acquired enemies within the party and were weak in the critical western states, while Lincoln was perceived as a moderate who could win the West. Most Republicans agreed with Lincoln that the North was the aggrieved party as the Slave Power tightened its grasp on the national government. Throughout the 1850s he denied that there would ever be a civil war, and his supporters repeatedly rejected claims that his election would incite secession. On May 9-10, 1860, the Illinois Republican State Convention was held in Decatur. At this convention, Lincoln received his first endorsement to run for the presidency.

Throughout the general election, Lincoln did not campaign or give speeches. This was handled by the state and county Republican organizations, who used the latest techniques to sustain party enthusiasm and thus obtain high turnout. There was little effort to convert non-Republicans, and there was virtually no campaigning in the South except for a few border cities such as St. Louis, Missouri, and Wheeling, Virginia; indeed, the party did not even run a slate in most of the South. In the North, there were thousands of Republican speakers, tons of campaign posters and leaflets, and thousands of newspaper editorials. These focused first on the party platform, and second on Lincoln's life story, making the most of his boyhood poverty, his pioneer background, his native genius, and his rise from obscurity. His nicknames, "Honest Abe" and "the Rail-Splitter," were exploited to the full. The goal was to emphasize the superior power of "free labor," whereby a common farm boy could work his way to the top by his own efforts.

On November 6, 1860, Lincoln was elected as the 16th President of the United States, beating Democrat Stephen A. Douglas, John C. Breckinridge of the Southern Democrats, and John Bell of the new Constitutional Union Party. He was the first Republican president, winning entirely on the strength of his support in the North: he was not even on the ballot in nine states in the South, and won only 2 of 996 counties in the other Southern states. Lincoln gained 1,865,908 votes (39.9% of the total), for 180 electoral votes; Douglas, 1,380,202 (29.5%) for 12 electoral votes; Breckenridge, 848,019 (18.1%) for 72 electoral votes; and Bell, 590,901 (12.5%) for 39 electoral votes. There were fusion tickets in some states, but even if his opponents had combined in every state, Lincoln had a majority vote in all but two of the states in which he won the electoral votes and would still have won the electoral college and the election.

With the emergence of the Republicans as the nation's first major sectional party by the mid-1850s, politics became the stage on which sectional tensions were played out. Although much of the West the focal point of sectional tensions was unfit for cotton cultivation, Southern secessionists read the political fallout as a sign that their power in national politics was rapidly weakening. Before, the slave system had been buttressed to an extent by the Democratic Party, which was increasingly seen as representing a more pro-Southern position that unfairly permitted Southerners to prevail in the nation's territories and to dominate national policy before the Civil War. But they suffered a significant reverse in the electoral realignment of the mid-1850s. 1860 was a critical election that marked a stark change in existing patterns of party loyalties among groups of voters; Abraham Lincoln's election was a watershed in the balance of power of competing national and parochial interests and affiliations.

As Lincoln's election became more likely, secessionists made it clear that their states would leave the Union. On December 20, 1860, South Carolina took the lead. By February 1, 1861, South Carolina was followed by six other cotton-growing states in the deep South. The seven states soon declared themselves to be a new nation, the Confederate States of America. The upper South (Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, Tennessee, Kentucky, Missouri, and Arkansas) listened to, but initially rejected, the secessionist appeal. President Buchanan and President-elect Lincoln refused to recognize the Confederacy.

Attempts at compromise, such as the Crittenden Compromise which would have extended the Missouri line of 1820, were discussed. Despite support for the Crittenden Compromise among some Republicans, Lincoln denounced it in private letters, saying "either the Missouri line extended, or... Pop. Sov. would lose us everything we gained in the election; that filibustering for all South of us, and making slave states of it, would follow in spite of us, under either plan",while other Republicans publicly stated it "would amount to a perpetual covenant of war against every people, tribe, and state owning a foot of land between here and Tierra del Fuego [at the far end of South America]."

President-elect Lincoln evaded possible assassins in Baltimore, and on February 23, 1861, arrived in disguise in Washington, D.C.

At his inauguration on March 4, 1861, the German American Turners formed Lincoln's bodyguard; and a sizable garrison of federal troops was also present, ready to protect the capital from Confederate invasion and local insurrection. In his First Inaugural Address, Lincoln declared, "I hold that in contemplation of universal law and of the Constitution the Union of these States is perpetual. Perpetuity is implied, if not expressed, in the fundamental law of all national governments," arguing further that the purpose of the United States Constitution was "to form a more perfect union" than the Articles of Confederation which were explicitly perpetual, thus the Constitution too was perpetual. He asked rhetorically that even were the Constitution a simple contract, would it not require the agreement of all parties to rescind it?

Also in his inaugural address, in a final attempt to reunite the states and prevent the looming war, Lincoln supported the pending Corwin Amendment to the Constitution, which had already passed Congress. This amendment, which explicitly protected slavery in those states in which it already existed, had more appeal to the critical border states than to the states that had already declared their separation.

By the time Lincoln took office, the Confederacy was an established fact, and no leaders of the insurrection proposed rejoining the Union on any terms. No compromise was found because a compromise was deemed virtually impossible. Buchanan might have allowed the southern states to secede, and some Republicans recommended that. However, conservative Democratic nationalists, such as Jeremiah S. Black, Joseph Holt, and Edwin M. Stanton had taken control of Buchanan's cabinet around January 1, 1861, and refused to accept secession. Lincoln and nearly every Republican leader adopted this position by March 1861: the Union could not be dismantled. Believing that a peaceful solution was still possible, Lincoln decided to not take any action against the South unless the Unionists themselves were attacked first. This finally happened in April 1861.

Historian Allan Nevins argues that Lincoln made three miscalculations in believing that he could preserve the Union, hold government property, and still avoid war. He "temporarily underrated the gravity of the crisis", overestimated the strength of Unionist sentiment in the South and border states, and misunderstood the conditional support of Unionists in the border states. In connection with Nevins's conclusions, it is interesting to note an incident from this period reported in the memoirs of William Tecumseh Sherman. Then a civilian, Sherman visited Lincoln in the White House during inauguration week, with his brother, Ohio Republican John Sherman. This meeting left the future General Sherman "sadly disappointed" at Lincoln's seeming failure to realize that "the country was sleeping on a volcano" and the South was "'preparing for war.'"

In April 1861, after Union troops at Fort Sumter were fired upon and forced to surrender, Lincoln called on the governors of every state to send detachments totaling 75,000 troops to recapture forts, protect the capital, and "preserve the Union," which in his view still existed intact despite the actions of the seceding states. Virginia, which had repeatedly warned Lincoln that it would not allow an invasion of its territory or join an attack on another state, responded by seceding, along with North Carolina, Tennessee, and Arkansas.

The slave states of Missouri, Kentucky, Maryland, and Delaware did not secede, and Lincoln urgently negotiated with state leaders there, promising not to interfere with slavery. After the fighting started, he had rebel leaders arrested in all the border areas (especially in Maryland) and held in military prisons without trial. Over 18,000 were arrested, though none were executed. One, Clement Vallandigham, was exiled; but all of the remainder were released, usually after two or three months (see: Ex parte Merryman).

In July 1862, Congress moved to free the slaves by passing the Second Confiscation Act. The goal was to weaken the rebellion, which was led and controlled by slave owners. While it did not abolish the legal institution of slavery (the Thirteenth Amendment did that), the Act showed that Lincoln had the support of Congress in liberating slaves owned by rebels. This new law was implemented with Lincoln's "Emancipation Proclamation."

Ending slavery was always a primary goal of the Lincoln administration. However, the American public was slow to embrace the idea. In a shrewdly penned letter to Horace Greeley, editor of The New York Tribune, Lincoln masked his goal of ending slavery by making it subservient to the cause of preserving the union:



The Emancipation Proclamation, announced on September 22 and put into effect on January 1, 1863, freed slaves in territories not under Union control. As Union armies advanced south, more slaves were liberated until all of them in Confederate hands (over three million) were freed. Lincoln later said: "I never, in my life, felt more certain that I was doing right, than I do in signing this paper." The proclamation made the abolition of slavery in the rebel states an official war goal. Lincoln then threw his energies into passage of the Thirteenth Amendment to permanently abolish slavery throughout the nation.

In September 1862, thirteen northern governors met in Altoona, Pennsylvania, at the Loyal War Governors' Conference to discuss the Proclamation and Union war effort. In the end, the state executives fully supported the president's Proclamation and also suggested the removal of General George B. McClellan as commander of the Union's Army of the Potomac.

For some time, Lincoln continued earlier plans to set up colonies for the newly freed slaves. He commented favorably on colonization in the Emancipation Proclamation, but all attempts at such a massive undertaking failed. As Frederick Douglass observed, Lincoln was, "The first great man that I talked with in the United States freely who in no single instance reminded me of the difference between himself and myself, of the difference of color."

Although the Battle of Gettysburg was a Union victory, it was also the bloodiest battle of the war and dealt a blow to Lincoln's war effort. As the Union Army decreased in numbers due to casualties, more soldiers were needed to replace the ranks. Lincoln's 1863 military drafts were considered "odious" among many in the north, particularly immigrants. The New York Draft Riots of July, 1863 were the most notable manifestation of this discontent.

Writing to Lincoln in September 1863, the Governor of Pennsylvania, Andrew Curtin, warned that political sentiments were turning against Lincoln and the war effort:



At the dedication of the Soldiers' National Cemetery in Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, on November 19, beginning with the now-iconic phrase "Four score and seven years ago...", Lincoln referred to the events of the Civil War and described the ceremony at Gettysburg as an opportunity not only to dedicate the grounds of a cemetery, but also to consecrate the living in the struggle to ensure that "government of the people, by the people, for the people, shall not perish from the earth".

After Union victories at Gettysburg, Vicksburg and Chattanooga in 1863, overall victory seemed at hand, and Lincoln promoted Ulysses S. Grant General-in-Chief ( March 12, 1864). When the spring campaigns turned into bloody stalemates, Lincoln supported Grant's strategy of wearing down Lee's Confederate army at the cost of heavy Union casualties. With an election looming, he easily defeated efforts to deny his renomination. At the Convention, the Republican Party selected Andrew Johnson, a War Democrat from the Southern state of Tennessee, as his running mate in order to form a broader coalition. They ran on the new Union Party ticket uniting Republicans and War Democrats.



Nevertheless, Republicans across the country feared that Lincoln would be defeated. Acknowledging this fear, Lincoln wrote and signed a pledge that, if he should lose the election, he would still defeat the Confederacy before turning over the White House:



Lincoln did not show the pledge to his cabinet, but asked them to sign the sealed envelope.

While the Democratic platform followed the Peace wing of the party and called the war a "failure," their candidate, General George B. McClellan, supported the war and repudiated the platform.

Lincoln provided Grant with new replacements and mobilized his party to support Grant and win local support for the war effort. Sherman's capture of Atlanta in September ended defeatist jitters; the Democratic Party was deeply split, with some leaders and most soldiers openly for Lincoln; the Union party was united and energized, and Lincoln was easily reelected in a landslide. He won all but two states, capturing 212 of 233 electoral votes.

On March 4, 1865, Lincoln delivered his second inaugural address, his favorite of all his speeches. At this time, a victory over the rebels was at hand, slavery was dead, and Lincoln was looking to the future.



The war was a source of constant frustration for the president, and occupied nearly all of his time. He had a contentious relationship with General McClellan, who became general-in-chief of all the Union armies in the wake of the embarrassing Union defeat at the First Battle of Bull Run and after the retirement of Winfield Scott in late 1861. Despite his inexperience in military affairs, Lincoln wanted to take an active part in determining war strategy. His priorities were twofold: to ensure that Washington, D.C. was well defended; and to conduct an aggressive war effort in the hope of ending the war quickly and appeasing the Northern public and press. McClellan, a youthful West Point graduate and railroad executive called back to active military service, took a more cautious approach. He took several months to plan and execute his Peninsula Campaign, with the objective of capturing Richmond by moving the Army of the Potomac by boat to the peninsula between the James and York Rivers. McClellan's delay irritated Lincoln, as did his insistence that no troops were needed to defend Washington, D.C. Lincoln insisted on holding some of McClellan's troops to defend the capital, a decision McClellan blamed for the ultimate failure of the Peninsula Campaign.

McClellan, a lifelong Democrat who was temperamentally conservative, was relieved as general-in-chief after releasing his Harrison's Landing Letter, where he offered unsolicited political advice to Lincoln urging caution in the war effort. McClellan's letter incensed Radical Republicans, who successfully pressured Lincoln to appoint John Pope, a Republican, as head of the new Army of Virginia. Pope complied with Lincoln's strategic desire to move toward Richmond from the north, thus protecting the capital from attack. But Pope was soundly defeated at the Second Battle of Bull Run in the summer of 1862, forcing the Army of the Potomac to defend Washington for a second time. In response to his failure, Pope was sent to Minnesota to fight the Sioux.



Panicked by Lee's invasion of Maryland, Lincoln restored McClellan to command of all forces around Washington in time for the Battle of Antietam (September 1862). The ensuing Union victory enabled Lincoln to release his Emancipation Proclamation, but he relieved McClellan of his command shortly after the 1862 midterm elections and appointed Republican Ambrose Burnside to head the Army of the Potomac. Burnside had promised to follow through on Lincoln's strategic vision for a strong offensive against Lee and Richmond. After Burnside was stunningly defeated at Fredericksburg, Joseph Hooker was given the command, despite his idle talk about the necessity for a military dictator to win the war and a past history of criticizing his commanders. Hooker was routed by Lee at the Battle of Chancellorsville (May 1863), and relieved of command early in the subsequent Gettysburg Campaign replaced by George Meade.

After the Union victory at Gettysburg, Meade's failure to pursue Lee and months of inactivity for the Army of the Potomac persuaded Lincoln to bring in a western general, Ulysses S. Grant. Grant already had a solid string of victories in the Western Theater, including the battles of Vicksburg and Chattanooga. Responding to criticism of Grant, Lincoln was quoted as saying, "I cannot spare this man. He fights." Grant waged his bloody Overland Campaign in 1864 with a strategy of a war of attrition, characterized by high Union losses at battles such as the Wilderness and Cold Harbor, but by proportionately higher Confederate losses. His invasion campaign eventually bottled Lee up in the Siege of Petersburg, so that Grant could take Richmond, and bring the war to a close in the spring of 1865.

Lincoln authorized Grant to target civilians and infrastructure, hoping to destroy the South's morale and weaken its economic ability to continue fighting. This allowed Generals Sherman and Sheridan to destroy farms and towns in the Shenandoah Valley, Georgia, and South Carolina. The damage caused by Sherman's March to the Sea through Georgia totaled in excess of $100 million by Sherman's own estimate.

Lincoln had a star-crossed record as a military leader, possessing a keen understanding of strategic points (such as the Mississippi River and the fortress city of Vicksburg) and the importance of defeating the enemy's army, rather than simply capturing cities. He had, however, limited success in motivating his commanders to adopt his strategies until late 1863, when he found a man who shared his vision of the war in Ulysses S. Grant. Only then could he insist on using African American troops and relentlessly pursue a series of coordinated offensives in multiple theaters.

Throughout the war, Lincoln showed a keen curiosity with the military campaigns. He spent hours at the War Department telegraph office, reading dispatches from his generals. He visited battle sites frequently, and seemed fascinated by watching scenes of war. During Jubal Anderson Early's raid on Washington, D.C. in 1864, Lincoln had to be told to duck to avoid being shot while observing the battle.

Reconstruction began during the war as Lincoln and his associates pondered questions of how to reintegrate the Southern states and what to do with Confederate leaders and the freed slaves. Lincoln led the "moderates" regarding Reconstructionist policy, and was usually opposed by the Radical Republicans, under Thaddeus Stevens in the House and Charles Sumner and Benjamin Wade in the Senate (though he cooperated with these men on most other issues). Determined to find a course that would reunite the nation and not alienate the South, Lincoln urged that speedy elections under generous terms be held throughout the war in areas behind Union lines. His Amnesty Proclamation of December 8, 1863, offered pardons to those who had not held a Confederate civil office, had not mistreated Union prisoners, and would sign an oath of allegiance. Critical decisions had to be made as state after state was reconquered. Of special importance were Tennessee, where Lincoln appointed Andrew Johnson as governor, and Louisiana, where Lincoln attempted a plan that would restore statehood when 10% of the voters agreed to it. The Radicals thought this policy too lenient, and passed their own plan, the Wade-Davis Bill, in 1864. When Lincoln pocket-vetoed the bill, the Radicals retaliated by refusing to seat representatives elected from Louisiana, Arkansas, and Tennessee.

Near the end of the war, Lincoln made an extended visit to Grant's headquarters at City Point, Virginia. This allowed the president to visit Richmond after it was taken by the Union forces and to make a public gesture of sitting at Jefferson Davis's own desk, symbolically saying to the nation that the President of the United States held authority over the entire land. He was greeted at the city as a conquering hero by freed slaves, whose sentiments were epitomized by one admirer's quote, "I know I am free for I have seen the face of Father Abraham and have felt him." When a general asked Lincoln how the defeated Confederates should be treated, Lincoln replied, "Let 'em up easy." Lincoln arrived back in Washington on the evening of April 9, 1865, the day Lee surrendered at Appomattox Court House in Virginia. The war was effectively over. The other rebel armies surrendered soon after, and there was no subsequent guerrilla warfare.

Lincoln's rhetoric defined the issues of the war for the nation, the world, and posterity. The Gettysburg Address defied Lincoln's own prediction that "the world will little note, nor long remember what we say here." His second inaugural address is also greatly admired and often quoted.

In recent years, historians have stressed Lincoln's use of and redefinition of republican values. As early as the 1850s, a time when most political rhetoric focused on the sanctity of the Constitution, Lincoln shifted emphasis to the Declaration of Independence as the foundation of American political values what he called the "sheet anchor" of republicanism. The Declaration's emphasis on freedom and equality for all, rather than the Constitution's tolerance of slavers, shifted the debate. As Diggins concludes regarding the highly influential Cooper Union speech, "Lincoln presented Americans a theory of history that offers a profound contribution to the theory and destiny of republicanism itself." His position gained strength because he highlighted the moral basis of republicanism, rather than its legalisms. Nevertheless, in 1861 Lincoln justified the war in terms of legalisms (the Constitution was a contract, and for one party to get out of a contract all the other parties had to agree), and then in terms of the national duty to guarantee a "republican form of government" in every state. That duty was also the principle underlying federal intervention in Reconstruction.

In his Gettysburg Address Lincoln redefined the American nation, arguing that it was born not in 1789 but in 1776, "conceived in Liberty, and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal." He declared that the sacrifices of battle had rededicated the nation to the propositions of democracy and equality, "that this nation shall have a new birth of freedom and that government of the people, by the people, for the people, shall not perish from the earth." By emphasizing the centrality of the nation, he rebuffed the claims of state sovereignty. While some critics say Lincoln moved too far and too fast, they agree that he dedicated the nation to values that marked "a new founding of the nation."

During the Civil War, Lincoln appropriated powers no previous President had wielded: he used his war powers to proclaim a blockade, suspended the writ of habeas corpus, spent money without congressional authorization, and imprisoned 18,000 suspected Confederate sympathizers without trial.

Lincoln believed in the Whig theory of the presidency, which left Congress to write the laws while he signed them, vetoing only those bills that threatened his war powers. Thus, he signed the Homestead Act in 1862, making millions of acres of government-held land in the West available for purchase at very low cost. The Morrill Land-Grant Colleges Act, also signed in 1862, provided government grants for agricultural universities in each state. The Pacific Railway Acts of 1862 and 1864 granted federal support for the construction of the United States' First Transcontinental Railroad, which was completed in 1869. Other important legislation involved economic matters, including the first income tax and higher tariffs. Also included was the creation of the system of national banks by the National Banking Acts of 1863, 1864, and 1865, which allowed the creation of a strong national financial system. Congress created and Lincoln approved the Department of Agriculture in 1862, although that institution would not become a Cabinet-level department until 1889.

The Legal Tender Act of 1862 established the United States Note, the first paper currency in United States history. This was done to increase the money supply to pay for fighting the war.

During the war, Lincoln's Treasury Department effectively controlled all cotton trade in the occupied South the most dramatic incursion of federal controls on the economy.

In 1862, Lincoln sent a senior general, John Pope, to put down the "Sioux Uprising" in Minnesota. Presented with 303 death warrants for convicted Santee Dakota who had massacred innocent farmers, Lincoln affirmed 39 of these for execution (one was later reprieved).

Illnesses included: frostbitten feet, malaria, physical trauma and smallpox. Claims that Lincoln had syphilis about 1835 have been controversial, but a recent analysis finds them credible.

As a child, Lincoln was tall for his age. He reached his adult height of  no later than age 21. Friends noticed his arms, legs, hands, and feet were long. Although well muscled as a young adult, he was always thin. Fragmentary evidence says he weighed around 170 pounds before the Presidency, but lost weight while in the White House. Based on Lincoln's unusual physical appearance, Dr. Abraham Gordon proposed in 1962 that Lincoln had Marfan syndrome. Lincoln's unremarkable cardiovascular history and his normal visual acuity have been the chief objections to the theory, and today the diagnosis is considered unlikely. Testing Lincoln's DNA for Marfan syndrome was contemplated in the 1990s, but such a test was not performed.

In 2007, Dr. John Sotos proposed that Lincoln had multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 2B (MEN2B). This theory suggests Lincoln had all the major features of the disease: a marfan-like body shape, large, bumpy lips, constipation, hypotonia, a history compatible with cancer and a family history of the disorder - his sons Eddie, Willie, and Tad, and probably his mother. The "mole" on Lincoln's right cheek, the asymmetry of his face, his large jaw, his drooping eyelid, and "pseudo-depression" are also suggested as manifestations of MEN2B. Lincoln's longevity is the principal challenge to the MEN2B theory, which could be proven by DNA testing.



Originally, John Wilkes Booth, a well-known actor and a Confederate spy from Maryland, had formulated a plan to kidnap Lincoln in exchange for the release of Confederate prisoners. After attending an April 11 speech in which Lincoln promoted voting rights for blacks, an incensed Booth changed his plans and determined to assassinate the president. Learning that the President and First Lady would be attending Ford's Theatre, he laid his plans, assigning his co-conspirators to assassinate Vice President Andrew Johnson and Secretary of State William H. Seward.

Without his main bodyguard Ward Hill Lamon, to whom he related his famous dream regarding his own assassination, Lincoln left to attend the play Our American Cousin on April 14, 1865. As a lone bodyguard wandered, and Lincoln sat in his state box (Box 7) in the balcony, Booth crept up behind the President and waited for what he thought would be the funniest line of the play ("You sock-dologizing old man-trap"), hoping the laughter would muffle the noise of the gunshot. When the laughter began, Booth jumped into the box and aimed a single-shot, round-slug 0.44 caliber Henry Deringer at his head, firing at point-blank range. Major Henry Rathbone momentarily grappled with Booth but was cut by Booth's knife. Booth then leapt to the stage and shouted "Sic semper tyrannis!" () and escaped, despite a broken leg suffered in the leap. A twelve-day manhunt ensued, in which Booth was chased by Federal agents (under the direction of Secretary of War Edwin M. Stanton). He was eventually cornered in a Virginia barn house and shot, dying of his wounds soon after.

An army surgeon, Doctor Charles Leale, initially assessed Lincoln's wound as mortal. The President was taken across the street from the theater to the Petersen House, where he lay in a coma for nine hours before dying. Several physicians attended Lincoln, including U.S. Army Surgeon General Joseph K. Barnes of the Army Medical Museum. Using a probe, Barnes located some fragments of Lincoln's skull and the ball lodged 6 inches (15 cm) inside his brain. Lincoln never regained consciousness and was pronounced dead at 7:22:10 a.m. April 15, 1865. There is some disagreement among historians as to Stanton's words after Lincoln died. All agree that he began "Now he belongs to the..." with some stating he said "ages" while others believe he said "angels." After Lincoln's body was returned to the White House, a brain-only autopsy was performed, and his body was prepared for his lying in repose in the East Room. He was the first president to be assassinated or to lie in state.

The Army Medical Museum, now named the National Museum of Health and Medicine, has retained in its collection several artifacts relating to the assassination. Currently on display are the bullet that was fired from the Philadelphia Deringer pistol, the probe used by Barnes, pieces of Lincoln's skull and hair, and the surgeon's cuff stained with Lincoln's blood. The chair in which Lincoln was shot is on display at the Henry Ford Museum in Detroit, Michigan.

Lincoln's body was carried by train in a grand funeral procession through several states on its way back to Illinois. While much of the nation mourned him as the savior of the United States, Copperheads celebrated the death of a man they considered a tyrant. The Lincoln Tomb in Oak Ridge Cemetery in Springfield, is 177 feet (54 m) tall and, by 1874, was surmounted with several bronze statues of Lincoln. To prevent repeated attempts to steal Lincoln's body and hold it for ransom, Robert Todd Lincoln had Lincoln exhumed and reinterred in concrete several feet thick in 1901.

Lincoln was known for appointing political rivals to high positions in his cabinet to keep in line all factions of his party and to let them battle each other and not combine against him. Historians agree that, except for Simon Cameron, it was a highly effective group.



Lincoln appointed the following Justices to the Supreme Court of the United States:



In March 1860 in a speech in New Haven, Connecticut, Lincoln said, with respect to slavery, Whenever this question shall be settled, it must be settled on some philosophical basis. No policy that does not rest upon some philosophical public opinion can be permanently maintained." The philosophical basis for Lincolns beliefs regarding slavery and other issues of the day require that Lincoln be examined "seriously as a man of ideas." Lincoln was a strong supporter of the American Whig version of liberal capitalism who, more than most politicians of the time, was able to express his ideas within the context of Nineteenth Century religious beliefs.

There were few people who strongly or directly influenced Lincolns moral and intellectual development and perspectives. There was no teacher, mentor, church leader, community leader, or peer that Lincoln would credit in later years as a strong influence on his intellectual development. Lacking a formal education, Lincolns personal philosophy was shaped by "an amazingly retentive memory and a passion for reading and learning." It was Lincolns reading, rather than his relationships, that were most influential in shaping his personal beliefs.

Lincoln did, even as a boy, largely reject organized religion, but the Calvinistic "doctrine of necessity" would remain a factor throughout his life. In 1846 Lincoln described the effect of this doctrine as "that the human mind is impelled to action, or held in rest by some power, over which the mind itself has no control." In April 1864, in justifying his actions in regard to Emancipation, Lincoln wrote, "I claim not to have controlled events, but confess plainly that events have controlled me. Now, at the end of three years struggle the nation's condition is not what either party, or any man devised, or expected. God alone can claim it."

As Lincoln matured, and especially during his term as president, the idea of a divine will somehow interacting with human affairs more and more influenced his public expressions. On a personal level, the death of his son Willie in February 1862 may have caused Lincoln to look towards religion for answers and solace. After Willies death, in the summer or early fall of 1862, Lincoln attempted to put on paper his private musings on why, from a divine standpoint, the severity of the war was necessary:



Lincolns religious skepticism was fueled by his exposure to the ideas of the Lockean Enlightenment and classical liberalism, especially economic liberalism. Consistent with the common practice of the Whig party, Lincoln would often use the Declaration of Independence as the philosophical and moral expression of these two philosophies. In a February 22, 1861 speech at Independence Hall in Philadelphia Lincoln said,



He found in the Declaration justification for Whig economic policy and opposition to territorial expansion and the nativist platform of the Know Nothings. In claiming that all men were created free, Lincoln and the Whigs argued that this freedom required economic advancement, expanded education, territory to grow, and the ability of the nation to absorb the growing immigrant population.

It was the Declaration of Independence, rather than the Bible, that Lincoln most relied on in order to oppose any further territorial expansion of slavery. He saw the Declaration as more than a political document. To him, as well as to many abolitionists and other antislavery leaders, it was, foremost, a moral document that had forever determined valuable criteria in shaping the future of the nation.

Lincoln's death made the President a martyr to many. Repeated polls of historians have ranked Lincoln as among the greatest presidents in U.S. history, often appearing in the first position. Among contemporary admirers, Lincoln is usually seen as personifying classical values of honesty and integrity, as well as respect for individual and minority rights, and human freedom in general.

Many American organizations of all purposes and agendas continue to cite his name and image, with interests ranging from the gay rights-supporting Log Cabin Republicans to the insurance corporation Lincoln National Corporation. The Lincoln automobile is also named after him. The ballistic missile submarine ''Abraham Lincoln'' (SSBN-602) and the aircraft carrier ''Abraham Lincoln'' (CVN-72) were named in his honor. Also, the Liberty ship SS Nancy Hanks was named for his mother. During the Spanish Civil War, the American faction of the International Brigades named themselves the Abraham Lincoln Brigade.

Lincoln has been memorialized in many city names, notably the capital of Nebraska. Lincoln, Illinois, is the only city to be named for Abraham Lincoln before he became President. Lincoln's name and image appear in numerous places. These include the Lincoln Memorial in Washington, D.C., the U.S. Lincoln $5 bill and the Lincoln cent, Lincoln's sculpture on the Mount Rushmore, and the Lincoln Home National Historic Site in Springfield, Illinois. In addition, New Salem, Illinois (a reconstruction of Lincoln's early adult hometown), Ford's Theatre, and Petersen House (where he died) are all preserved as museums. The Lincoln Shrine in Redlands, California, is located behind the A.K. Smiley Public Library. The state nickname for Illinois is Land of Lincoln.

Counties in 18 U.S. states (Arkansas, Colorado, Idaho, Kansas, Maine, Minnesota, Mississippi, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New Mexico, Oklahoma, Oregon, South Dakota, West Virginia, Washington, Wisconsin, and Wyoming) are named after Lincoln.

Abraham Lincoln's birthday, February 12, was formerly a national holiday, now commemorated as Presidents' Day. However, it is still observed in Illinois and many other states as a separate legal holiday, Lincoln's Birthday. A dozen states have legal holidays celebrating the third Monday in February as 'Presidents' Day' as a combination Washington-Lincoln Day.

To commemorate his upcoming 200th birthday in February 2009, Congress established the Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial Commission (ALBC) in 2000. Dedicated to renewing American appreciation of Lincolns legacy, the 15-member commission is made up of lawmakers and scholars and also features an advisory board of over 130 various Lincoln historians and enthusiasts. Located at Library of Congress in Washington, D.C., the ALBC is the organizing force behind numerous tributes, programs and cultural events highlighting a two-year celebration scheduled to begin in February 2008 at Lincolns birthplace: Hodgenville, Kentucky.

Lincoln's birthplace and family home are national historic memorials: the Abraham Lincoln Birthplace National Historic Site in Hodgenville, and the Lincoln Home National Historic Site in Springfield, Illinois. The Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum opened in Springfield in 2005; it is a major tourist attraction, with state-of-the-art exhibits. The Abraham Lincoln National Cemetery is located in Elwood, Illinois.



Illinois' 7th congressional district, 1846

1856 Republican National Convention (Vice Presidential tally):

Illinois United States Senate election, 1858:

1860 Republican National Convention (Final Results on 3rd Ballot):

United States presidential election, 1860

United States presidential election, 1864





Books referenced





















Project Gutenberg eTexts









Ernest Hemingway

Ernest Miller Hemingway (July 21, 1899 July 2, 1961) was an American novelist, short-story writer, and journalist. He was part of the 1920s expatriate community in Paris, and one of the veterans of World War I later known as "the Lost Generation." He received the Pulitzer Prize in 1953 for The Old Man and the Sea, and the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1954.

Hemingway's distinctive writing style is characterized by economy and understatement, and had a significant influence on the development of twentieth-century fiction writing. His protagonists are typically stoical men who exhibit an ideal described as "grace under pressure." Many of his works are now considered classics of American literature.

Ernest Miller Hemingway was born on July 21, 1899 in Oak Park, Illinois, a suburb of Chicago. Hemingway was the first son and the second child born to Clarence Edmonds "Doc Ed" Hemingway - a country doctor, and Grace Hall Hemingway. Hemingway's father attended the birth of Ernest and blew a horn on his front porch to announce to the neighbors that his wife had given birth to a boy. The Hemingways lived in a six-bedroom Victorian house built by Ernest's widowed maternal grandfather, Ernest Miller Hall, an English immigrant and Civil War veteran who lived with the family. Hemingway was his namesake. Hemingway's mother once aspired to an opera career and earned money giving voice and music lessons. She was domineering and narrowly religious, mirroring the strict Protestant ethic of Oak Park, which Hemingway later said had "wide lawns and narrow minds". While his mother hoped that her son would develop an interest in music, Hemingway adopted his father's outdoorsman hobbies of hunting, fishing and camping in the woods and lakes of Northern Michigan. The family owned a summer home called Windemere on Walloon Lake, near Petoskey, Michigan and often spent summers vacationing there. These early experiences in close contact with nature instilled in Hemingway a lifelong passion for outdoor adventure and for living in remote or isolated areas.

Hemingway attended Oak Park and River Forest High School from September 1913 until graduation in June 1917. He excelled both academically and athletically; he boxed, played American football, and displayed particular talent in English classes. His first writing experience was writing for "Trapeze" and "Tabula" (the school's newspaper and yearbook, respectively) in his junior year, then serving as editor in his senior year. He sometimes wrote under the pen name Ring Lardner, Jr., a nod to his literary hero Ring Lardner.

After high school, Hemingway did not want to go to college. Instead, at age eighteen, he began his writing career as a cub reporter for The Kansas City Star. Although he worked at the newspaper for only six months (October 17, 1917-April 30, 1918), throughout his lifetime he used the guidance of the Star's style guide as a foundation for his writing style: "Use short sentences. Use short first paragraphs. Use vigorous English. Be positive, not negative." In honor of the centennial year of Hemingway's birth (1899), The Star named Hemingway its top reporter of the last hundred years.

Hemingway left his reporting job after only a few months and, against his father's wishes, tried to join the United States Army to see action in World War I. He failed the medical examination due to poor vision, and instead joined the Red Cross Ambulance Corps. On his route to the Italian front, he stopped in Paris, which was under constant bombardment from German artillery. Instead of staying in the relative safety of the Hotel Florida, Hemingway tried to get as close to combat as possible.Soon after arriving on the Italian Front Hemingway witnessed the brutalities of war. On his first day on duty an ammunition factory near Milan blew up. Hemingway had to pick up the humanprimarily femaleremains. Hemingway wrote about this experience in his short story "A Natural History of the Dead". This first encounter with death left him shaken.

The soldiers he met later did not lighten the horror. One of them, Eric Dorman-Smith, entertained Hemingway with a line from Part Two of Shakespeare's ''Henry IV'', Act III, Scene II: "By my troth, I care not; a man can die but once; we owe God a death...and let it go which way it will, he that dies this year is quit for the next." (Hemingway, for his part, would quote this line in "The Short Happy Life of Francis Macomber", one of his famous short stories set in Africa.) To another soldier, Hemingway once said, "You are troppo vecchio (It. too old) for this war, pop." The 50-year old soldier replied, "I can die as well as any man."

On July 8, 1918, Hemingway was wounded delivering supplies to soldiers, which ended his career as an ambulance driver. He was hit by an Austrian trench mortar shell that left fragments in his legs, and was also hit by a burst of machine-gun fire. He was later awarded the Silver Medal of Military Valor (medaglia d'argento) from the Italian government for dragging a wounded Italian soldier to safety in spite of his own injuries. He was credited as the first American wounded in Italy during WWI by newspapers at the time but there is debate surrounding the veracity of this claim.

Hemingway received treatment in a Milan hospital run by the American Red Cross. With very little in the way of entertainment, he often drank heavily and read newspapers to pass the time. Here he met Agnes von Kurowsky of Washington, D.C., one of eighteen nurses attending groups of four patients each, who was more than six years his senior. Hemingway fell in love with her, but their relationship did not survive his return to the United States; instead of following Hemingway to America, as originally planned, she became romantically involved with an Italian officer. This left an indelible mark on his psyche and provided inspiration for, and was fictionalized in, one of his early novels, A Farewell to Arms. Hemingway's first story based on this relationship, "A Very Short Story," appeared in 1925. 

After the war, Hemingway returned to Oak Park, and in 1920, he moved to an apartment on 1599 Bathurst Street, now known as The Hemingway, in the Humewood-Cedarvale neighborhood in Toronto, Ontario. During his stay, he found a job with the Toronto Star newspaper. He worked as a freelancer, staff writer, and foreign correspondent. Hemingway befriended fellow Star reporter Morley Callaghan. Callaghan had begun writing short stories at this time; he showed them to Hemingway, who praised them as fine work. They would later be reunited in Paris.

For a short time from late 1920 through most of 1921, Hemingway lived on the near north side of Chicago, while still filing stories for The Toronto Star. He also worked as associate editor of the Co-operative Commonwealth, a monthly journal. On September 3, 1921, Hemingway married his first wife, Hadley Richardson. After the honeymoon they moved to a cramped top floor apartment on the 1300 block of Clark Street. In September, they moved to a cramped fourth floor apartment (3rd floor by Chicago building standard) at 1239 North Dearborn in a then run-down section of Chicago's near north side. The building still stands with a plaque on the front of it calling it "The Hemingway Apartment." Hadley found it dark and depressing, but in December, 1921, the Hemingways left Chicago and Oak Park, never to live there again, and moved abroad.

On the advice of Sherwood Anderson, they settled in Paris, France, where Hemingway covered the Greco-Turkish War for the Toronto Star. Anderson gave him a letter of introduction to Gertrude Stein. She became his mentor and introduced him to the "Parisian Modern Movement" then ongoing in the Montparnasse Quarter; this was the beginning of the American expatriate circle that became known as the "Lost Generation", a term popularized by Hemingway in the epigraph to his novel, The Sun Also Rises, and his memoir, A Moveable Feast. The epithet, "Lost Generation" was reportedly appropriated by Miss Stein from her French garage mechanic when he made the offhand comment that hers was "une gnration perdue". ("'That's what you are. That's what you all are,' Miss Stein said. 'All of you young people who served in the war. You are a lost generation.'" -- from Hemingway's posthumous memoir, A Moveable Feast.) His other influential mentor was Ezra Pound, the founder of imagism. Hemingway later said of this eclectic group, "Ezra was right half the time, and when he was wrong, he was so wrong you were never in any doubt about it. Gertrude was always right." The group often frequented Sylvia Beach's bookshop, Shakespeare & Co., at 12 Rue de l'Odon. After the 1922 publication and American banning of colleague James Joyce's Ulysses, Hemingway used Toronto-based friends to smuggle copies of the novel into the United States (Hemingway writes of meeting and talking with Joyce in Paris in A Movable Feast). His own first book, called Three Stories and Ten Poems (1923), was published in Paris by Robert McAlmon.

After much success as a foreign correspondent, Hemingway returned to Toronto, Canada in 1923 writing under the pseudonym of Peter Jackson. During his second stint living in Toronto, Hemingway's first son was born. He was named John Hadley Nicanor Hemingway, but would later be known as Jack. Hemingway asked Gertrude Stein to be Jack's godmother.

Around the same time, Hemingway had a bitter falling out with his editor, Harry Hindmarsh, who believed Hemingway had been spoiled by his time overseas. Hindmarsh gave Hemingway mundane assignments, and Hemingway grew bitter and wrote an angry resignation in December 1923. However, his resignation was either ignored or rescinded, and Hemingway continued to write sporadically for The Toronto Star through 1924. Most of Hemingway's work for the Star was later published in the 1985 collection .

Hemingway's American literary debut came with the publication of the short story cycle In Our Time (1925). The vignettes that now constitute the interchapters of the American version were initially published in Europe as in our time (1924). This work was important for Hemingway, reaffirming to him that his minimalist style could be accepted by the literary community. "Big Two-Hearted River" is the collection's best-known story.

In April 1925, two weeks after the publication of The Great Gatsby, Hemingway met F. Scott Fitzgerald at the Dingo Bar. Fitzgerald and Hemingway were at first close friends, often drinking and talking together. They sometimes exchanged manuscripts, and Fitzgerald did much to try to advance Hemingway's career and the publication of his first collections of stories.

Hemingway's relationships in France provided inspiration for Hemingway's first full-length novel, The Sun Also Rises (1926) (published in the UK under the title "Fiesta"). The novel was semi-autobiographical, following a group of expatriate Americans around Paris and Spain. The climactic scenes of the novel are set in Pamplona, during the fiesta that the novel made famous throughout Europe and the U.S. The novel was a success and met with critical acclaim. While Hemingway had initially claimed that the novel was an obsolete form of literature, he was apparently inspired to write it after reading Fitzgerald's manuscript for The Great Gatsby.

Hemingway divorced Hadley Richardson in 1927 and married Pauline Pfeiffer, a devout Roman Catholic from Piggott, Arkansas. Pfeiffer was an occasional fashion reporter, publishing in magazines such as Vanity Fair and Vogue. Hemingway converted to Catholicism himself at this time. That year saw the publication of Men Without Women, a collection of short stories, containing The Killers, one of Hemingway's best-known and most-anthologized stories. In 1928, Hemingway and Pfeiffer moved to Key West, Florida, to begin their new life together. However, their new life was soon interrupted by yet another tragic event in Hemingway's life.

In 1928, Hemingway's father, Clarence, troubled with diabetes and financial instabilities, committed suicide using an old Civil War pistol. This greatly hurt Hemingway and is perhaps played out through Robert Jordan's father's suicide in the novel For Whom the Bell Tolls. He immediately traveled to Oak Park to arrange the funeral and stirred up controversy by vocalizing what he thought to be the Catholic view, that suicides go to hell. At about the same time, Harry Crosby, founder of the Black Sun Press and a friend of Hemingway's from his days in Paris, also committed suicide. In that same year, Hemingway's second son, Patrick, was born in Kansas City (his third son, Gregory, would be born to the couple a few years later). It was a Caesarean birth after difficult labor, details of which were incorporated into the concluding scene of A Farewell to Arms. Hemingway lived and wrote most of A Farewell to Arms plus several short stories at Pauline's parents' house in Piggott, Arkansas. The Pfeiffer House and Carriage House has since been converted into a museum owned by Arkansas State University.

Published in 1929, A Farewell to Arms recounts the romance between Frederic Henry, an American soldier, and Catherine Barkley, a British nurse. The novel is heavily autobiographical: the plot was directly inspired by his relationship with Agnes von Kurowsky in Milan; Catherine's parturition was inspired by the intense labor pains of Pauline in the birth of Patrick; the real-life Kitty Cannell inspired the fictional Helen Ferguson; the priest was based on Don Giuseppe Bianchi, the priest of the 69th and 70th regiments of the Brigata Ancona. While the inspiration of the character Rinaldi is obscure, he had already appeared in In Our Time. A Farewell to Arms was published at a time when many other World War I books were prominent, including Frederic Manning's Her Privates We, Erich Maria Remarque's All Quiet on the Western Front, Richard Aldington's Death of a Hero, and Robert Graves' Goodbye to All That. The success of A Farewell to Arms made Hemingway financially independent.

Following the advice of John Dos Passos, Hemingway returned to Key West, Florida in 1931, where he established his first American home, which has since been converted to a museum. From this 1851 solid limestone house — a wedding present from Pauline's uncle — Hemingway fished in the waters around the Dry Tortugas with his longtime friend Waldo Pierce, went to the famous bar Sloppy Joe's, and occasionally traveled to Spain, gathering material for Death in the Afternoon and Winner Take Nothing. Over the next 9 years, until the end of this marriage in 1940, and then in a second period throughout the 1950s, Hemingway would do an estimated 70% of his lifetime's writing in the writer's den in the upper floor of the converted garage, in back of this house.

Death in the Afternoon, a book about bullfighting, was published in 1932. Hemingway had become an aficionado after seeing the Pamplona fiesta of 1925, fictionalized in The Sun Also Rises. In Death in the Afternoon, Hemingway extensively discussed the metaphysics of bullfighting: the ritualized, almost religious practice. Hemingway considered becoming a bullfighter himself and showed middling aptitude in several novieros before deciding that writing was his true and only suitable professional metier. In his writings on Spain, he was influenced by the Spanish master Po Baroja. When Hemingway won the Nobel Prize, he traveled to see Baroja, then on his death bed, specifically to tell him he thought Baroja deserved the prize more than he. Baroja agreed and something of the usual Hemingway tiff with another writer ensued despite his original good intentions.

A safari in the fall of 1933 led him to Mombasa, Nairobi, and Machakos in Kenya, moving on to Tanzania, where he hunted in the Serengeti, around Lake Manyara and west and southeast of the present-day Tarangire National Park. 1935 saw the publication of Green Hills of Africa, an account of his safari. The Snows of Kilimano and The Short Happy Life of Francis Macomber were the fictionalized results of his African experiences. Hemingway fell ill on this trip, suffering a prolapsed intestine.

In 1937, Hemingway traveled to Spain in order to report on the Spanish Civil War for the North American Newspaper Alliance. While there, Hemingway broke his friendship with John Dos Passos because, despite warnings, Dos Passos continued to report on the atrocities of not only the fascist Nationalists whom Hemingway disliked, but also those of the elected and radicalized left-leaning Republicans whom he favored; characteristically, Hemingway spread a story that Dos Passos had fled Spain out of cowardice. In this context Hemingway's colleague and associate Herbert Matthews, who would become more well known for his favorable reports on Fidel Castro, showed a similar predilection for the Republican side as Hemingway. Hemingway, who was a convert to Catholicism during his marriage to his wife Pauline, began to question his religion at this time, eventually leaving the church (though friends indicate that he had "funny ties" to Catholicism for the rest of his life). The war also strained Hemingway's marriage. Pauline Pfieffer was a devout Catholic and, as such, sided with the fascist, pro-Catholic regime of Franco, whereas Hemingway mostly supported the Republican government, for all his criticisms of it. During this time, Hemingway wrote a little known essay, The Denunciation, which would not be published until 1969 within a collection of stories, the Fifth Column and Four Stories of the Spanish Civil War. The story seems autobiographical, suggesting that Hemingway might have been an informant for the Republic as well as a weapons instructor during the war.

Some health problems characterized this period of Hemingway's life: an anthrax infection, a cut eyeball, a gash in his forehead, grippe, toothache, hemorrhoids, kidney trouble from fishing, torn groin muscle, finger gashed to the bone in an accident with a punching ball, lacerations (to arms, legs, and face) from a ride on a runaway horse through a deep Wyoming forest, and a broken arm from a car accident.

In 1938—along with his only full-length play, titled The Fifth Column—49 stories were published in the collection The Fifth Column and the First Forty-Nine Stories. Hemingway's intention was, as he openly stated in his foreword, to write more. Many of the stories that make up this collection can be found in other abridged collections, including In Our Time, Men Without Women, Winner Take Nothing, and The Snows of Kilimanjaro.

Some of the collection's important stories include Old Man at the Bridge, On The Quai at Smyrna, Hills Like White Elephants, One Reader Writes, The Killers and (perhaps most famously) A Clean, Well-Lighted Place. While these stories are rather short, the book also includes much longer stories, among them The Snows of Kilimanjaro and The Short Happy Life of Francis Macomber.

In the spring of 1939, Francisco Franco and the Nationalists defeated the Republicans, ending the Spanish Civil War. Hemingway lost an adopted homeland to Franco's fascists, and would later lose his beloved Key West, Florida, home due to his 1940 divorce. 

A few weeks after the divorce, he married his companion of four years in Spain, Martha Gellhorn, his third wife. 

His novel For Whom the Bell Tolls was published in 1940. It was written in 1939 in Cuba and Key West, and was finished in July 1940. The long work, which is set during the Spanish Civil War, was based on real events and tells of an American named Robert Jordan fighting with Spanish soldiers on the Republican side. It was largely based on Hemingway's experience of living in Spain and reporting on the war. It is one of his most notable literary accomplishments. The title is taken from the penultimate paragraph of John Donne's Meditation XVII.

The United States entered World War II on December 8, 1941, and for the first time in his life, Hemingway sought to take part in naval warfare. Aboard the Pilar, now a Q-Ship, Hemingway's crew was charged with sinking German submarines threatening shipping off the coasts of Cuba and the United States. After the FBI took over Caribbean counter-espionage, he went to Europe as a war correspondent for Collier's magazine. There Hemingway observed the D-Day landings from an LCVP (landing craft), although he was not allowed to go ashore. He later became angry that his wife, Martha Gellhorn — by then, more a rival war correspondent than a wife — had managed to get ashore in the early hours of June 7 dressed as a nurse, after she had crossed the Atlantic to England in a ship loaded with explosives. Hemingway acted as an unofficial liaison officer at Chteau de Rambouillet, and afterwards formed his own partisan group which, as he later wrote, took part in the liberation of Paris.  Although this claim has been challenged by many historians, he was nevertheless unquestionably on the scene. It has also been purported that while traveling to the front he threw a hand grenade into a basement room full of German field grade officers despite his official non-combatant role. 

After the war, Hemingway started work on The Garden of Eden, which was never finished and would be published posthumously in a much-abridged form in 1986. At one stage, he planned a major trilogy which was to comprise "The Sea When Young", "The Sea When Absent" and "The Sea in Being" (the latter eventually published in 1952 as The Old Man and the Sea). He spent time in a small Italian town called Acciaroli (located approximately 136 km south of Naples). There was also a "Sea-Chase" story; three of these pieces were edited and stuck together as the posthumously-published novel Islands in the Stream (1970).

Newly divorced from Gellhorn after four contentious years, Hemingway married war correspondent Mary Welsh Hemingway, whom he had met overseas in 1944. He returned to Cuba, and in 1945 at the Soviet Embassy became public witness to the Rolando Masferrer schism within the Cuban communist party (Garca Montes, and Alonso vila, 1970 p. 362).

Hemingway's first novel after For Whom the Bell Tolls was Across the River and into the Trees (1950), set in post-World War II Venice. He derived the title from the last words of American Civil War Confederate General Stonewall Jackson. Enamored of a young Italian girl (Adriana Ivancich) at the time, Hemingway wrote Across the River and into the Trees as a romance between a war-weary Colonel Cantwell (based on his friend, then Colonel Charles Lanham) and the young Renata (clearly based on Adriana; "Renata" has an assonance with "rinata", meaning "reborn" in Italian). The novel received largely bad reviews, many of which accused Hemingway of tastelessness, stylistic ineptitude, and sentimentality; however this criticism was not shared by all critics.

One section of the sea trilogy was published as The Old Man and the Sea in 1952. That novella's great success, both commercial and critical, satisfied and fulfilled Hemingway. It earned him the Pulitzer Prize in 1953. The next year he was awarded with the Nobel Prize in Literature. Upon receiving the latter he noted that he would have been "happy; happier...if the prize had been given to that beautiful writer Isak Dinesen". These awards helped to restore his international reputation.

Then, his legendary bad luck struck once again; on a safari, he was seriously injured in two successive plane crashes; he sprained his right shoulder, arm, and left leg, had a grave concussion, temporarily lost vision in his left eye and the hearing in his left ear, suffered paralysis of the spine, a crushed vertebra, ruptured liver, spleen and kidney, and first degree burns on his face, arms, and leg. Some American newspapers mistakenly published his obituary, thinking he had been killed.

Hemingway was then badly injured one month later in a bushfire accident, which left him with second degree burns on his legs, front torso, lips, left hand and right forearm. The pain left him in prolonged anguish, and he was unable to travel to Stockholm to accept his Nobel Prize.

A glimmer of hope came with the discovery of some of his old manuscripts from 1928 in the Ritz cellars, which were transformed into A Moveable Feast. Although some of his energy seemed to be restored, severe drinking problems kept him down. His blood pressure and cholesterol were perilously high, he suffered from aortal inflammation, and his depression was aggravated by his dipsomania. However, in October 1956, Hemingway found the strength to travel to Madrid and act as a pallbearer at Po Baroja's burial. Baroja was one of Hemingway's literary influences.

Following the revolution in Cuba and the ousting of General Fulgencio Batista in 1959, expropriations of foreign owned property led many Americans to return to the United States. Hemingway chose to stay a little longer. It is commonly said that he maintained good relations with Fidel Castro and declared his support for the revolution, and he is quoted as wishing Castro "all luck" with running the country. However, the Hemingway account "The Shot" is used by Cabrera Infante and others as evidence of conflict between Hemingway and Fidel Castro dating back to 1948 and the killing of "Manolo" Castro, a friend of Hemingway. Hemingway came under surveillance by the FBI both during World War II and afterwards (most probably because of his long association with marxist Spanish Civil War veterans who were again active in Cuba) for his residence and activities in Cuba. In 1960, he left the island and Finca Viga, his estate outside Havana, that he owned for over twenty years. The official Cuban government account is that it was left to the Cuban government, which has made it into a museum devoted to the author. In 2001, Cuba's state-owned tourism conglomerate, El Gran-Caribe SA, began licensing the La Bodeguita del Medio international restaurant chain relying largely on the original Havana restaurant's association with Hemingway, a frequent visitor.

In February 1960, Ernest Hemingway was unable to get his bullfighting narrative The Dangerous Summer to the publishers. He therefore had his wife Mary summon his friend, Life Magazine bureau head Will Lang Jr., to leave Paris and come to Spain. Hemingway persuaded Lang to let him print the manuscript, along with a picture layout, before it came out in hardcover. Although not a word of it was on paper, the proposal was agreed upon. The first part of the story appeared in Life Magazine on September 5, 1960, with the remaining installments being printed in successive issues.

Hemingway was upset by the photographs in his The Dangerous Summer article. He was receiving treatment in Ketchum, Idaho for high blood pressure and liver problems — and also electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) for depression and continued paranoia, although this may in fact have helped to precipitate his suicide, since he reportedly suffered significant memory loss as a result of the shock treatments. He also lost weight, his 6-foot (183 cm) frame appearing gaunt at 170 pounds (77 kg, 12st 2lb).

Hemingway attempted suicide in the spring of 1961, and received ECT treatment again. On the morning of July 2, 1961, some three weeks short of his 62nd birthday, he died at his home in Ketchum, Idaho, the result of a self-inflicted shotgun wound to the head. Judged not mentally responsible for his final act, he was buried in a Roman Catholic service. Hemingway himself blamed the ECT treatments for "putting him out of business" by destroying his memory; some medical and scholarly opinion has been receptive to this view, although others, including one of the physicians who prescribed the electroshock regimen, dispute that opinion.

Hemingway is believed to have purchased the Boss & Co. shotgun he used to commit suicide through Abercrombie & Fitch, which was then an elite excursion goods retailer and firearm supplier. In a particularly gruesome suicide, he rested the gun butt of the double-barreled shotgun on the floor of a hallway in his home, leaned over it to put the twin muzzles to his forehead just above the eyes, and pulled both triggers. The coroner, at request of the family, did not do an autopsy.

Other members of Hemingway's immediate family also committed suicide, including his father, Clarence Hemingway, his siblings Ursula and Leicester, and possibly his granddaughter Margaux Hemingway. Some believe that certain members of Hemingway's paternal line had a hereditary disease known as haemochromatosis (bronze diabetes), in which an excess of iron concentration in the blood causes damage to the pancreas and also causes depression or instability in the cerebrum. Hemingway's father is known to have developed haemochromatosis in the years prior to his suicide at age fifty-nine. Throughout his life, Hemingway had been a heavy drinker, succumbing to alcoholism in his later years.

Hemingway possibly suffered from manic depression, and was subsequently treated with electroshock therapy at Menninger Clinic. He later blamed his memory loss, which he cited as a reason for not wanting to live, upon the ECT sessions.

Hemingway is interred in the town cemetery in Ketchum, Idaho, at the north end of town. A memorial was erected in 1966 at another location, overlooking Trail Creek, north of Ketchum. It is inscribed with a eulogy he wrote for a friend, Gene Van Guilder:



Best of all he loved the fallThe leaves yellow on the cottonwoodsLeaves floating on the trout streamsAnd above the hillsThe high blue windless skiesNow he will be a part of them forever

Ernest Hemingway - Idaho - 1939

Celebrating Hemingway's love for Idaho and the frontier, The Ernest Hemingway Festival takes place annually in Ketchum and Sun Valley in late September with scholars, a reading by the PEN/Hemingway Award winner and many more events, including historical tours, open mic nights and a sponsored dinner at Hemingway's home in Warm Springs now maintained by the Nature Conservancy in Ketchum.

Hemingway was a prolific letter writer and, in 1981, many of these were published by Scribner in Ernest Hemingway Selected Letters. It was met with some controversy as Hemingway himself stated he never wished to publish his letters. Further letters were published in a book of his correspondence with his editor Max Perkins, The Only Thing that Counts [1996].

A long-term project is now underway to publish the thousands of letters Hemingway wrote during his lifetime. The project is being undertaken as a joint venture by Penn State University and the Ernest Hemingway Foundation. Sandra Spanier, Professor of English and wife of Penn State president Graham Spanier, is serving as general editor of the collection.

Hemingway was still writing up to his death; most of the unfinished works which were Hemingway's sole creation have been published posthumously; they are A Moveable Feast, Islands in the Stream, The Nick Adams Stories (portions of which were previously unpublished), The Dangerous Summer, and The Garden of Eden. In a note forwarding "Islands in the Stream", Mary Hemingway indicated that she worked with Charles Scribner, Jr. on "preparing this book for publication from Ernest's original manuscript". She also stated that "beyond the routine chores of correcting spelling and punctuation, we made some cuts in the manuscript, I feel that Ernest would surely have made them himself. The book is all Ernest's. We have added nothing to it." Some controversy has surrounded the publication of these works, insofar as it has been suggested that it is not necessarily within the jurisdiction of Hemingway's relatives or publishers to determine whether these works should be made available to the public. For example, scholars often disapprovingly note that the version of The Garden of Eden published by Charles Scribner's Sons in 1986, though in no way a revision of Hemingway's original words, nonetheless omits two-thirds of the original manuscript.

The Nick Adams Stories appeared posthumously in 1972. What is now considered the definitive compilation of all of Hemingway's short stories was published as The Complete Short Stories Of Ernest Hemingway, first compiled and published in 1987. As well, in 1969 The Fifth Column and Four Stories Of The Spanish Civil War was published. It contains Hemingway's only full length play, The Fifth Column, which was previously published along with the First Forty-Nine Stories in 1938, along with four unpublished works written about Hemingway's experiences during the Spanish Civil War.

In 1999, another novel entitled True at First Light appeared under the name of Ernest Hemingway, though it was heavily edited by his son Patrick Hemingway. Six years later, Under Kilimanjaro, a re-edited and considerably longer version of True at First Light appeared. In either edition, the novel is a fictional account of Hemingway's final African safari in 19531954. He spent several months in Kenya with his fourth wife, Mary, before his near-fatal plane crashes. Anticipation of the novel, whose manuscript was completed in 1956, adumbrates perhaps an unprecedentedly large critical battle over whether it is proper to publish the work (many sources mention that a new, light side of Hemingway will be seen as opposed to his canonical, macho image), even as editors Robert W. Lewis of University of North Dakota and Robert E. Fleming of University of New Mexico have pushed it through to publication; the novel was published on September 15, 2005.

Also published posthumously were several collections of his work as a journalist. These contain his columns and articles for Esquire Magazine, The North American Newspaper Alliance, and the Toronto Star; they include Byline: Ernest Hemingway edited by William White, and Hemingway: The Wild Years edited by Gene Z. Hanrahan. Finally, a collection of introductions, forwards, public letters and other miscellanea was published as Hemingway and the Mechanism of Fame in 2005.

The influence of Hemingway's writings on American literature was considerable and continues today. James Joyce called "A Clean, Well Lighted Place" "one of the best stories ever written". (The same story also influenced several of Edward Hopper's best known paintings, most notably "Nighthawks." ) Pulp fiction and "hard boiled" crime fiction (which flourished from the 1920s to the 1950s) often owed a strong debt to Hemingway. 

During World War II, J. D. Salinger met and corresponded with Hemingway, whom he acknowledged as an influence. In one letter to Hemingway, Salinger wrote that their talks "had given him his only hopeful minutes of the entire war," and jokingly "named himself national chairman of the Hemingway Fan Clubs." 

Hunter S. Thompson often compared himself to Hemingway, and terse Hemingway-esque sentences can be found in his early novel, The Rum Diary. Thompson's later suicide by gunshot to the head mirrored Hemingway's. 

Hemingway's terse prose style--"Nick stood up. He was all right."-- is known to have inspired Charles Bukowski, Chuck Palahniuk, Douglas Coupland and many Generation X writers. Hemingway's style also influenced Jack Kerouac and other Beat Generation writers. Hemingway also provided a role model to fellow author and hunter Robert Ruark, who is frequently referred to as "the poor man's Ernest Hemingway". 

Popular novelist Elmore Leonard, who has authored scores of western- and crime-genre novels, cites Hemingway as his preeminent influence, and this is evident in his tightly written prose. Though Leonard has never claimed to write serious literature, he has said: "I learned by imitating Hemingway.... until I realized that I didn't share his attitude about life. I didn't take myself or anything as seriously as he did."

During his lifetime Hemingway was awarded:

A minor planet, discovered in 1978 by Soviet astronomer Nikolai Stepanovich Chernykh, was named for him3656 Hemingway.

On July 17, 1989, the United States Postal Service issued a 25-cent postage stamp honoring Hemingway.



Novels

Collections

Anthologies - edited by Hemingway

Nonfiction

Stage Plays



Television productions

U.S./UK Film Adaptations













Colin Powell

Colin Luther Powell, KCB (Honorary), MSC, (born April 5, 1937) is a retired General in the United States Army. He was the 65th United States Secretary of State (2001-2005), serving under President George W. Bush. He was the first African American appointed to that position. As a General in the United States Army, Powell also served as National Security Advisor (19871989) and as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (19891993), holding the latter position during the Gulf War. He was the first and, so far, the only African American to serve on the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Powell was born in Harlem, a neighborhood in the New York City borough of Manhattan in 1937 to Jamaican immigrant parents and was raised in the South Bronx. He also has Scottish, and other ancestries. Powell attended Morris High School, a former public school in The Bronx, New York City, from which he graduated in 1954. While in school, he worked a local shop where he picked up Yiddish from the shopkeepers and some of the customers. He remembers some of his Yiddish to this day. He gained a bachelor's degree in geology from City College of New York attaining a "C" average, according to his 2006 graduation address at Marymount University. He later obtained an MBA from The George Washington University after his second tour in Vietnam in 1971.

In 1962, he married Alma, who is now the co-chair of America's Promise. He is the father of Michael Powell, the former chair of the Federal Communications Commission (Michael Powell was known mostly for a public battle with radio host Howard Stern).

Powell's first name is fairly common in the United Kingdom and Ireland but rare in the United States. He pronounces his name "cole-in"; most other men with this name pronounce it "coll-in" in the United Kingdom. In general, public officials and radio and television reporters have used Powell's preferred pronunciation.

While at City College Powell joined the Reserve Officers' Training Corps and later described it as one of the happiest experiences of his life: finding something he loved and could do well, he had "found himself." Cadet Powell joined the Pershing Rifles, the ROTC fraternal organization and drill team started by GEN John Pershing. Even after Powell became a General, he still kept on his desk a pen set he had won for a drill team competition. After graduating from City College in June 1958, he was granted a commission as an Army Second Lieutenant. Powell was a professional soldier for 35 years, during which time he held a variety of command and staff positions and rose to the rank of General. 

While serving with the Third Armored Division in Germany as a Lieutenant, he met Elvis Presley, then serving in that unit. During the Vietnam War, Powell was a captain, serving as a South Vietnamese Army advisor from 1962 to 1963. While on patrol in a Viet Cong-held area, he was wounded after stepping on a punji stake trap. He returned to Vietnam as a major from 1968 to 1970, where he first served as the executive officer for the Americal Division (23rd Infantry Division), then as the assistant chief of staff of operations for the Americal Division. In that post, he was charged with investigating a detailed letter by Tom Glen (a soldier from the 11th Light Infantry Brigade), which backed up rumored allegations of the My Lai Massacre. Powell wrote: "In direct refutation of this portrayal is the fact that relations between Americal soldiers and the Vietnamese people are excellent." Later, Powell's assessment would be described as whitewashing the news of the massacre, and questions would continue to remain undisclosed to the public. In May 2004 Powell said to Larry King, "I mean, I was in a unit that was responsible for My Lai. I got there after My Lai happened. So, in war, these sorts of horrible things happen every now and again, but they are still to be deplored."

Powell obtained an MBA from George Washington University in 1971 and then served a White House fellowship under President Richard Nixon. 

In his autobiography My American Journey, Powell mentioned several officers he served under that inspired and mentored him. As a Lieutenant Colonel serving in South Korea, for example, Powell was very close to General Henry "Gunfighter" Emerson. Powell said he regarded this man as one of the most caring officers he ever served under. Emerson reputedly had a somewhat eccentric personality. For example, he insisted his troops train only at night and made them repeatedly watch the television film Brian's Song to promote racial harmony. Powell always professed, however, that what set Emerson apart was his great love of his soldiers and concern for their welfare.

 the early 1980s, Powell served at Fort Carson, Colorado. It was there that he had a major clash with General John Hudachek, his commander. Hudachek said in an efficiency evaluation that Powell was a poor leader who should not be promoted. Powell's rising military career was unhindered by Hudachek's evaluation report. After he left Fort Carson, Powell became senior military assistant to Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger, whom he assisted during the 1983 invasion of Grenada and the 1986 airstrike on Libya. 

In 1986, he took over the command of V Corps in Frankfurt Germany from Robert Lewis "Sam" Wetzel. In 1989, prior to being named Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Powell served as the Commander in Chief, Forces Command headquartered at Fort McPherson, Georgia.

At the age of 49, Powell became Ronald Reagan's National Security Advisor, serving from 1987 to 1989. He retained his Army commission (he was a Lieutenant General at the time of his nomination) while serving as National Security Advisor. After his tenure with the NSC, Powell was promoted to 4-star General under President George H.W. Bush and served as Commander-in-Chief (CINC) of the United States Army's Forces Command (FORSCOM), overseeing all Army, Army Reserve, and National Guard units in the Continental U.S., Alaska, Hawaii, and Puerto Rico.



His last military assignment, from October 1, 1989 to September 30, 1993, was as the 12th Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the highest military position in the Department of Defense. At age 52, he became the youngest officer, and first Afro-Caribbean American, to serve in this position. In 1989, he joined Dwight D. Eisenhower and Alexander Haig as the third general since World War II to reach four-star rank without ever being a divisional commander. Powell was also the first JCS Chair who was not a collegiate graduate of a United States Service academy, but rather, through ROTC. During this time, he oversaw 28 crises, including the invasion of Panama in 1989 to remove General Manuel Noriega from power in the United States invasion of Panama and Operation Desert Storm in the 1991 Persian Gulf War. During these events, Powell earned his nickname, "the reluctant warrior". He rarely advocated military intervention as the first solution to an international dispute, and instead usually prescribed diplomacy and containment.



Powell mentioned in his autobiography that he is haunted by the nightmare of the Vietnam War. He felt the leadership was very ineffective. Powell served a tour in Vietnam as a military advisor, and was mildly injured when he stepped on a bamboo "punji stick." The large infection made it difficult for him to walk, and caused his foot to swell for a short time, shortening his first tour. It was also during his Vietnam service, his second tour, that Powell was decorated for bravery. He single-handedly rescued several men from a burning helicopter, one of them being Maj. Gen. Charles Gettys, the commander of the Americal Division.

Powell opposed the majority of George H.W. Bush Administration officials who advocated the deployment of troops to the Middle East to force Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein to withdraw his armies from neighboring Kuwait, believing the dictator could instead be contained through sanctions and a buildup of forces around Kuwait.

As an officer, Powell also valued loyalty very highly. As a military strategist, he has advocated an approach to military conflicts that maximizes the potential for success and minimizes casualties. A component of this approach is the use of overwhelming force, which he applied to Operation Desert Storm in 1991. His approach has been dubbed the "Powell Doctrine".

Colin Powell's experience in military matters made him a very popular figure with both American political parties. Many Democrats admired his moderate stance on military matters, while many Republicans saw him as a great asset associated with the successes of past Republican administrations. Powell eventually declared himself a Republican, and began to campaign for Republican candidates. He was touted as a possible opponent of Bill Clinton in the 1996 U.S. Presidential Election, but Powell declined.

In 1997 Powell founded America's Promise with the objective of helping children from all socioeconomic sectors. Powell often wears the logo of the organization in the form of a red wagon pin on his lapel.

In the 2000 U.S. Presidential Election Powell campaigned for Texas Governor George W. Bush, serving as a key foreign policy advisor to the campaign. At the same time, it was often hinted that Powell might have been appointed to a position within a Democratic administration, should Al Gore have won. Bush eventually won, and Colin Powell was appointed Secretary of State.



As Secretary of State in the Bush administration, Powell was perceived as moderate. Powell's great asset was his tremendous popularity among the American people. Over the course of his tenure he traveled less than any other U.S. Secretary of State in 30 years. Powell was unanimously voted in by the United States Senate.

On September 11, 2001, Powell was in Lima, Peru, meeting with President Alejandro Toledo and US Ambassador to Peru John Hamilton, and attending the special session of the OAS General Assembly that subsequently adopted the Inter-American Democratic Charter.

After September 11, Powell's job became of critical importance in managing America's relationships with foreign countries in order to secure a stable coalition in the War on Terrorism.

In April 2002, he visited the site of the alleged Jenin Massacre in the West Bank and later said while testifying to Congress, "I've seen no evidence that would suggest a massacre took place." Details of the events were unclear at the time, Shimon Peres was quoted by Ha'aretz speaking of a  and IDF estimates of the dead were in the 100s. Later investigations by human rights organizations and the United Nations placed the number of deaths amongst Palestinians at 52.

Powell came under fire for his role in building the case for the 2003 Invasion of Iraq. In a press statement on February 24, 2001 he had said that sanctions against Iraq had prevented the development of any weapons of mass destruction by Saddam Hussein. As was the case in the days leading up to the Persian Gulf War, Powell was initially opposed to a forcible overthrow of Hussein, preferring to continue a policy of containment. However, Powell eventually agreed to go along with the Bush administration's determination to remove Hussein. He had often clashed with others in the administration, who were reportedly planning an Iraq invasion even before the September 11 attacksan insight supported by testimony by former terrorism czar Richard Clarke in front of the 9/11 Commission. The main concession Powell wanted before he would offer his full support for the Iraq War was the involvement of the international community in the invasion, as opposed to the unilateral approach some advocated. He was also successful in persuading Bush to take the case of Iraq to the United Nations, and in moderating other initiatives. Powell was placed at the forefront of this diplomatic campaign.



Powell's chief role was to garner international support for a multi-national coalition to mount the invasion. To this end, Powell addressed a plenary session of the United Nations Security Council on February 5, 2003 to argue in favor of military action. Citing "numerous" anonymous Iraqi defectors, Powell asserted that "there can be no doubt that Saddam Hussein has biological weapons and the capability to rapidly produce more, many more." Powell also stated that there was "no doubt in my mind" that Saddam was working to obtain key components to produce nuclear weapons.

Most observers praised Powell's oratorical skills. However, Britain's Channel 4 News reported soon afterwards that a UK intelligence dossier that Powell had referred to as a "fine paper" during his presentation had been based on old material and plagiarized an essay by an American graduate student. A 2004 report by the Iraq Survey Group concluded that the evidence that Powell offered to support the allegation that the Iraqi government possessed weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) was inaccurate. 

A Senate report on intelligence failures would later detail the intense debate that went on behind the scenes on what to include in Powell's speech. State Department analysts had found dozens of factual problems in drafts of the speech. Some of the claims were taken out, but others were left in, such as claims based on the yellowcake forgery. The administration came under fire for having acted on faulty intelligence. Reports have indicated that Powell himself was skeptical of the evidence presented to him. Powell later recounted how Vice President Cheney had joked with him before he gave the speech, telling him, "You've got high poll ratings; you can afford to lose a few points." Larry Wilkerson later characterized Cheney's view of Powell's mission as to "go up there and sell it, and we'll have moved forward a peg or two. Fall on your damn sword and kill yourself, and I'll be happy, too."

In September 2005, Powell was asked about the speech during an interview with Barbara Walters and responded that it was a "blot" on his record. He went on to say, "It will always be a part of my record. It was painful. It's painful now."

Mr. Powell's longtime aide-de-camp Colonel Lawrence B. Wilkerson said that he participated in a hoax on the American people in preparing Mr. Powell's erroneous testimony before the United Nations Security Council.

Because Powell was seen as more moderate than most figures in the administration, he was spared many of the attacks that have been leveled at more controversial advocates of the invasion, such as Donald Rumsfeld and Paul Wolfowitz. At times, infighting between the Powell-led State Department, the Rumsfeld-led Defense Department, and Vice President Dick Cheney's office had the effect of paralyzing the administration on crucial issues, such as what actions to take regarding Iran and North Korea.



After Saddam Hussein had been deposed, Powell's new role was to once again establish a working international coalition, this time to assist in the rebuilding of post-war Iraq. On September 13, 2004, Powell testified before the Senate Governmental Affairs Committee, acknowledging that the sources who provided much of the information in his February 2003 UN presentation were "wrong" and that it was "unlikely" that any stockpiles of WMDs would be found. Claiming that he was unaware that some intelligence officials questioned the information prior to his presentation, Powell pushed for reform in the intelligence community, including the creation of a national intelligence director who would assure that "what one person knew, everyone else knew".

Colin Powell announced his resignation as Secretary of State on Monday, November 15, 2004. According to the Washington Post, he had been asked to resign by the president's chief of staff, Andrew Card. Powell announced that he would stay on until the end of Bush's first term or until his replacement's confirmation by Congress. The following day, George W. Bush nominated National Security Advisor Condoleezza Rice as Powell's successor. News of Powell's leaving the Administration spurred mixed reactions from politicians around the worldsome upset at the loss of a statesman seen as a moderating factor within the Bush administration, but others hoping for Powell's successor to wield more influence within the cabinet, and thus be a more credible negotiator.

In mid-November, Colin Powell stated that he had seen new evidence suggesting that Iran was adapting missiles for a nuclear delivery system. The accusation came at the same time as the settlement of an agreement between the IAEA, the European Union and Iran.

On December 31, 2004, Powell rang in the New Year by throwing the ball in Times Square with New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg, ushering in the year 2005. He appeared on the networks that were broadcasting New Year's Eve specials and talked about this honor, as well as being a native of New York City.

After retiring from the role of Secretary of State, Powell returned to private life. In April 2005, he was privately telephoned by Republican senators Lincoln Chafee and Chuck Hagel, at which time Powell expressed reservations and mixed reviews about the nomination of John R. Bolton as ambassador to the United Nations, but refrained from advising the senators to oppose Bolton (Powell had clashed with Bolton during Bush's first term). The decision was viewed as potentially dealing significant damage to Bolton's chances of confirmation. Bolton was put into the position via a recess appointment because of the strong opposition in the Senate.

On 28 April 2005, an opinion piece in the The Guardian by Sidney Blumenthal (a former top aide to President Bill Clinton) claimed that Powell was in fact "conducting a campaign" against Bolton because of the acrimonious battles they had had while working together, which among other things had resulted in Powell cutting Bolton out of talks with Iran and Libya after complaints about Bolton's involvement from the British. Blumenthal added that "The foreign relations committee has discovered that Bolton made a highly unusual request and gained access to 10 intercepts by the National Security Agency. Staff members on the committee believe that Bolton was probably spying on Powell, his senior advisers and other officials reporting to him on diplomatic initiatives that Bolton opposed."

In July 2005, Powell joined Kleiner, Perkins, Caufield & Byers, a well-known Silicon Valley venture capital firm, with the title of "strategic limited partner".

In September 2005, Powell criticized the response to Hurricane Katrina. Powell said that thousands of people were not properly protected, but because they were poor rather than because they were black. 

On January 5 2006, he participated in a meeting at the White House of former Secretaries of Defense and State to discuss United States foreign policy with Bush administration officials. In September 2006, Powell sided with more moderate Senate Republicans in supporting more rights for detainees and opposing President Bush's terrorism bill. He backed Senators John Warner, John McCain and Lindsey Graham in their statement that U.S. military and intelligence personnel in future wars will suffer for abuses committed in 2006 by the U.S. in the name of fighting terrorism. Powell stated that "The world is beginning to doubt the moral basis of [America's] fight against terrorism."

Also in 2006, Powell began appearing as a speaker at a series of motivational events called Get Motivated, along with former New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani. In his speeches for the tour, he openly criticized the Bush Administration on a number of issues. Powell has been the recipient of mild criticism for his role with Get Motivated which has been called a "get-rich-quick-without-much-effort, feel-good schemology." 

Most recently he joined the Board of Directors of Steve Case's new company Revolution Health. Powell also serves on the Council on Foreign Relations Board of directors.

Powell, in honor of Martin Luther King Day, dropped the ceremonial first puck at a New York Islanders game at Nassau Coliseum.

Recently, Powell has encouraged young people to continue to use new technologies to their advantage in the future. In a speech at the Center for Strategic and International Studies to a room of young professionals, he said, "Thats your generationa generation that is hard-wired digital, a generation that understands the power of the information revolution and how it is transforming the world. A generation that you represent, and youre coming together to share; to debate; to decide; to connect with each other." At this event, he encouraged the next generation to involve themselves politically on the upcoming Next America Project, which uses online debate to provide policy recommendations for the upcoming administration.

In 2008, Powell served as a spokesperson for National Mentoring Month, a campaign held each January to recruit volunteer mentors for at-risk youth.

A moderate Republican, Powell is well known for his willingness to support liberal or centrist causes. He is pro-choice regarding abortion, and in favor of "reasonable" gun control. He stated in his autobiography that he supports affirmative action that levels the playing field, without giving a leg up to undeserving person because of racial issues. Powell was also instrumental in the implementation of the military's Don't Ask, Don't Tell policy.

The Vietnam War had a profound effect on Powell's views of the proper use of military force. These views are described in detail in the autobiography My American Journey. The Powell Doctrine, as the views became known, was a central component of US policy in the Gulf War (the first U.S. war in Iraq) and U.S. invasion of Afghanistan (the overthrow of the Taliban regime in Afghanistan following the events of "9/11"). The hallmark of both operations was strong international cooperation, and the use of overwhelming military force.

Powell was the subject of controversy in 2004 when, in a conversation with British Foreign Secretary, Jack Straw, he reportedly referred to neoconservatives within the Bush administration as "fucking crazies". In addition to being reported in the press (though generally, the expletive was censored in the U.S. press), the quote was used by James Naughtie in his book, The Accidental American: Tony Blair and the Presidency, and by Chris Patten in his book, Cousins and Strangers: America, Britain, and Europe in a New Century.

In a letter to Sen. John McCain, General Powell expressed opposition to President Bush's push for military tribunals of those formerly and currently classified as enemy combatants. Specifically, he expressed concern of Bush's plan to "amend the interpretation of Article III of the Geneva Conventions." He also pointed out that perception of the War on Terror may be losing moral support saying, "The world is beginning to doubt the moral basis of our fight against terrorism."In the beginning of 2008, his name was mentioned as a possible running mate of Republican nominee John McCain for the 2008 U.S. presidential election. In the summer of 2007, Powell donated the maximum to John McCain's campaign. However, some have speculated that Powell may ultimately endorse Barack Obama.

On August 13, 2008, Fox News analyst Bill Kristol stated that Powell will endorse Barack Obama for president and may give a speech at the 2008 Democratic National Convention. Powell has said in response that "I do not have time to waste on Bill Kristol's musings." Powell told CNN News in February 2008 that "I will vote for the candidate I think can do the best job in Americawhether that candidate is a Republican or Democrat or an independent". But on August 23, The Politico reported that Powell was considered by John McCain for the vice-presidency.  In the end, Powell did not give a speech at the Democratic National Convention and was not nominated to be the Vice Presidential candidate under John McCain.

In July 2007 Powell revealed that he spent two and a half hours trying to persuade George W. Bush not to invade Iraq but that he did not prevail. At the Aspen Ideas Festival in Colorado Powell stated, "I tried to avoid this war. I took him [Bush] through the consequences of going into an Arab country and becoming the occupiers."

Powell went on to say that he believed Iraq was in a state of civil war. "The civil war will ultimately be resolved by a test of arms. It's not going to be pretty to watch, but I don't know any way to avoid it. It is happening now." He further noted, "It is not a civil war that can be put down or solved by the armed forces of the United States," and suggested that all the U.S. military could do was put "a heavier lid on this pot of boiling sectarian stew".

Powell's civilian awards includes two Presidential Medals of Freedom, the President's Citizens Medal, the Congressional Gold Medal, the Secretary of State Distinguished Service Medal, the Secretary of Energy Distinguished Service Medal, and the Ronald Reagan Freedom Award. Several schools and other institutions have been named in his honor and he holds honorary degrees from universities and colleges across the country.







 







Dwight Eisenhower

Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower (October 14, 1890 March 28, 1969) was President of the United States from 1953 until 1961 and a five-star general in the United States Army. During the Second World War, he served as Supreme Commander of the Allied forces in Europe, with responsibility for planning and supervising the successful invasion of France and Germany in 194445. In 1951, he became the first supreme commander of NATO.

As President, he oversaw the cease-fire of the Korean War, kept up the pressure on the Soviet Union during the Cold War, made nuclear weapons a higher defense priority, launched the Space Race, enlarged the Social Security program, and began the Interstate Highway System.

Eisenhower was born David Dwight Eisenhower in Denison, Texas, the first president born in that state. He was the third of seven sons born to David Jacob Eisenhower and Ida Elizabeth Stover. The house in which he was born has been preserved as Eisenhower Birthplace State Historic Site and is operated by the Texas Historical Commission.

He was named David Dwight and was called Dwight; he reversed the order of his given names when he entered West Point,, which is also where "Ike" received his nickname.

Eisenhower's paternal ancestors can be traced back to Hans Nicolas Eisenhauer, whose surname was German for "iron worker." Hans Eisenhauer and his family emigrated from Karlsbrunn (Saarland), Germany to Lancaster, Pennsylvania in 1741. Descendants made their way west. Eisenhower's family settled in Abilene, Kansas in 1892. His father David Eisenhower was a college-educated engineer. Eisenhower graduated from Abilene High School in 1909.

Eisenhower married Mamie Geneva Doud (1896 1979) of Denver, Colorado on July 1, 1916. The couple had two sons. Doud Dwight Eisenhower was born September 24, 1917, and died of scarlet fever on January 2, 1921, at the age of three. Their second son, John Sheldon David Doud Eisenhower, was born the following year on August 3, 1922; John served in the United States Army (retiring as a brigadier general from the Army reserve), became an author, and served as U.S. Ambassador to Belgium from 1969 to 1971. John, coincidentally, graduated from West Point on D-Day, June 6, 1944, and was married to Barbara Jean Thompson in a June wedding in 1947. John and Barbara had four children: Dwight David II, Barbara Ann, Susan Elaine and Mary Jean. John's son, David, after whom Camp David is named, married Richard Nixon's daughter Julie in 1968.

Eisenhower's paternal ancestor, Hans Nicholas Eisenhauer, was probably of Lutheran or Reformed Protestant practice. Eisenhower's mother, Ida E. Eisenhower, previously a member of the River Brethren sect of the Mennonites, joined the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society (now more commonly known as Jehovah's Witnesses) between 1895 and 1900, when Eisenhower was a child. The Eisenhower home served as the local meeting hall from 1896 to 1915.

When Eisenhower joined the U.S. Military Academy at West Point, New York in 1911, his ties to Jehovahs Witnesses were weakened because of the group's anti-militarist stance. By 1915, his parents' home no longer served as the meeting hall. All the men in the household abandoned the Witnesses as adults. Some hid their previous affiliation. At his death in 1942, Eisenhower's father was given funeral rites as though he remained a Jehovah's Witness. Eisenhower's mother continued as an active Jehovah's Witness until her death. Despite their differences in religious beliefs, Eisenhower enjoyed a close relationship with his mother. 

Eisenhower was baptized, confirmed, and became a communicant in the Presbyterian Church in a single ceremony on February 1, 1953, just 12 days after his first inauguration. He is the only president known to have undertaken these rites while in office. Eisenhower was instrumental in the addition of the words "under God" to the Pledge of Allegiance in 1954, and the 1956 adoption of "In God We Trust" as the motto of the US, and its 1957 introduction on paper currency. In his retirement years, he was a member of the Gettysburg Presbyterian Church. The chapel at his presidential library is intentionally inter-denominational.

He questioned Billy Graham about how people can be certain they are going to Heaven after death.

Eisenhower was sworn into office with his personal West Point Bible, open to Psalm 33:12, at both his 1953 and 1957 inaugural ceremonies. Additionally for 1953, he included the Bible that George Washington had used in 1789 (belonging to St. John's Masonic Lodge No. 1), opened to II Chronicles 7:14.

Dwight D. Eisenhower attended Abilene High School in Abilene, Kansas and graduated with the class of 1909. He then took a job as a night foreman at the Belle Springs Creamery.

After Dwight worked for two years to support his brother Edgar's college education, a friend urged him to apply to the Naval Academy. Though Eisenhower passed the entrance exam, he was beyond the age of eligibility for admission to the Naval Academy.

Kansas Senator Joseph L. Bristow recommended Dwight for an appointment to the Military Academy in 1911, which he received. Eisenhower graduated in the upper half of the class of 1915.

Eisenhower long had aspirations of playing professional baseball. He is quoted as saying:

At West Point, Eisenhower tried out for the baseball team but did not make it. He would later be quoted as saying that "Not making the baseball team at West Point was one of the greatest disappointments of my life, maybe my greatest." But Eisenhower did make the football team. He started as a varsity running back and linebacker in 1912. In a bit of a fabled match-up, he even tackled the legendary Jim Thorpe in a 1912 game. The next week however, Eisenhower would hurt his knee after being tackled around the ankles, which he would soon worsen and permanently damage on horseback and in the boxing ring. He would later serve as junior varsity football coach and yell leader.

Controversy persists over whether Eisenhower played minor league (semi-professional) baseball for Junction City in the Central Kansas League the year before he attended West Point and played amateur football there.

In 1916, while stationed at Fort Sam Houston, Eisenhower was football coach for St. Louis College, now St. Mary's University.

Eisenhower enrolled at the United States Military Academy at West Point in June 1911. His parents were against militarism, but did not object to his entering West Point because they supported his education. Eisenhower was a strong athlete and enjoyed notable successes in his competitive endeavors. In 1912, a spectacular Eisenhower touchdown won praise from the sports reporter of the New York Herald, and he even managed, with the help of a linebacker teammate, to tackle the legendary Jim Thorpe. In the very next week, however, his promising sports career ended when he incurred a severe knee injury.



Eisenhower graduated in 1915. He served with the infantry until 1918 at various camps in Texas and Georgia. During World War I, Eisenhower became the #3 leader of the new tank corps and rose to temporary (Bvt.) Lieutenant Colonel in the National Army. He spent the war training tank crews in Pennsylvania and never saw combat. After the war, Eisenhower reverted to his regular rank of captain (and was promoted to major a few days later) before assuming duties at Camp Meade, Maryland, where he remained until 1922. His interest in tank warfare was strengthened by many conversations with George S. Patton and other senior tank leaders; however their ideas on tank warfare were strongly discouraged by superiors.

Eisenhower became executive officer to General Fox Conner in the Panama Canal Zone, where he served until 1924. Under Conner's tutelage, he studied military history and theory (including Karl von Clausewitz's On War), and later cited Conner's enormous influence on his military thinking. In 192526, he attended the Command and General Staff College at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, and then served as a battalion commander at Fort Benning, Georgia until 1927.



During the late 1920s and early 1930s Eisenhower's career in the peacetime Army stagnated; many of his friends resigned for high paying business jobs. He was assigned to the American Battle Monuments Commission, directed by General John J. Pershing, then to the Army War College, and then served as executive officer to General George V. Mosely, Assistant Secretary of War, from 1929 to 1933. He then served as chief military aide to General Douglas MacArthur, Army Chief of Staff, until 1935, when he accompanied MacArthur to the Philippines, where he served as assistant military adviser to the Philippine government. It is sometimes said that this assignment provided valuable preparation for handling the challenging personalities of Winston Churchill, George S. Patton and Bernard Law Montgomery during World War II. Eisenhower was promoted to lieutenant colonel (in a non-brevet status) in 1936 after sixteen years as a major. He also learned to fly, although he was never rated as a military pilot. He made a solo flight over the Philippines in 1937.

Eisenhower returned to the U.S. in 1939 and held a series of staff positions in Washington, D.C., California and Texas. In June 1941, he was appointed Chief of Staff to General Walter Krueger, Commander of the 3rd Army, at Fort Sam Houston in San Antonio, Texas. He was promoted to brigadier general on October 3, 1941. Although his administrative abilities had been noticed, on the eve of the U.S. entry into World War II he had never held an active command and was far from being considered as a potential commander of major operations.



After the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, Eisenhower was assigned to the General Staff in Washington, where he served until June 1942 with responsibility for creating the major war plans to defeat Japan and Germany. He was appointed Deputy Chief in charge of Pacific Defenses under the Chief of War Plans Division, General Leonard T. Gerow, and then succeeded Gerow as Chief of the War Plans Division. Then he was appointed Assistant Chief of Staff in charge of Operations Division under Chief of Staff General George C. Marshall. It was his close association with Marshall that finally brought Eisenhower to senior command positions. Marshall recognized his great organizational and administrative abilities.

In 1942, Eisenhower was appointed Commanding General, European Theater of Operations (ETOUSA) and was based in London. In November, he was also appointed Supreme Commander Allied (Expeditionary) Force of the North African Theater of Operations (NATOUSA) through the new operational Headquarters A(E)FHQ. The word "expeditionary" was dropped soon after his appointment for security reasons. In February 1943, his authority was extended as commander of AFHQ across the Mediterranean basin to include the British 8th Army, commanded by General Bernard Law Montgomery. The 8th Army had advanced across the Western Desert from the east and was ready for the start of the Tunisia Campaign. Eisenhower gained his fourth star and gave up command of ETOUSA to be commander of NATOUSA. After the capitulation of Axis forces in North Africa, Eisenhower remained in command of the renamed Mediterranean Theater of Operations (MTO), keeping the operational title and continued in command of NATOUSA redesignated MTOUSA. In this position he oversaw the invasion of Sicily and the invasion of the Italian mainland.



In December 1943, it was announced that Eisenhower would be Supreme Allied Commander in Europe. In January 1944, he resumed command of ETOUSA and the following month was officially designated as the Supreme Allied Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Force (SHAEF), serving in a dual role until the end of hostilities in Europe in May 1945. In these positions he was charged with planning and carrying out the Allied assault on the coast of Normandy in June 1944 under the code name Operation Overlord, the liberation of western Europe and the invasion of Germany. A month after the Normandy D-Day landings on June 6, 1944, the invasion of southern France took place, and control of the forces which took part in the southern invasion passed from the AFHQ to the SHAEF. From then until the end of the War in Europe on May 8, 1945, Eisenhower through SHAEF had supreme command of all operational Allied forces2, and through his command of ETOUSA, administrative command of all U.S. forces, on the Western Front north of the Alps.

As recognition of his senior position in the Allied command, on December 20, 1944, he was promoted to General of the Army equivalent to the rank of Field Marshal in most European armies. In this and the previous high commands he held, Eisenhower showed his great talents for leadership and diplomacy. Although he had never seen action himself, he won the respect of front-line commanders. He dealt skillfully with difficult subordinates such as Omar Bradley and Patton, and allies such as Winston Churchill, Field Marshal Bernard Montgomery and General Charles de Gaulle. He had fundamental disagreements with Churchill and Montgomery over questions of strategy, but these rarely upset his relationships with them. He negotiated with Soviet Marshal Zhukov, and such was the confidence that President Franklin D. Roosevelt had in him, he sometimes worked directly with Stalin, much to the chagrin of the British High Command who disliked being bypassed. During the advance towards Berlin, he was notified by General Bradley that Allied forces would suffer an estimated 100,000 casualties before taking the city. The Soviet Army sustained 80,000 casualties during the fighting in and around Berlin, the last large number of casualties suffered in the war against Nazism.

It was never certain that Operation Overlord would succeed. The seriousness surrounding the entire decision, including the timing and the location of the Normandy invasion, might be summarized by a second shorter speech that Eisenhower wrote in advance, in case he needed it. Long after the successful landings on D-Day and the BBC broadcast of Eisenhower's brief speech concerning them, the never-used second speech was found in a shirt pocket by an aide. It read:

Eisenhower served as Chief of Staff of the U.S. Army from 194548.  Following the German unconditional surrender on May 8, 1945, Eisenhower was appointed Military Governor of the U.S. Occupation Zone, based in Frankfurt am Main. Germany was divided into four Occupation Zones, one each for the U.S., Britain, France, and the Soviet Union. Upon full discovery of the death camps that were part of the Final Solution (Holocaust), he ordered camera crews to comprehensively document evidence of the atrocity for use in the war crimes tribunals. He made the decision to reclassify German prisoners of war (POWs) in U.S. custody as Disarmed Enemy Forces (DEFs), thus depriving them of the protection of the Geneva convention. As DEFs, their food rations could be lowered and they could be compelled to serve as unfree labor (see Eisenhower and German POWs). Eisenhower was an early supporter of the Morgenthau Plan to permanently remove Germany's industrial capacity to wage future wars. In November 1945 he approved the distribution of 1000 free copies of Morgenthau's book Germany is Our Problem, which promoted and described the plan in detail, to American military officials in occupied Germany. Historian Stephen Ambrose draws the conclusion that, despite Eisenhower's later claims the act was not an endorsement of the Morgenthau plan, Eisenhower both approved of the plan and had previously given Morgenthau at least some of his ideas about how Germany should be treated. He also incorporated officials from Morgenthau's Treasury into the army of occupation. These were commonly called "Morgenthau boys" for their zeal in interpreting the occupation directive JCS 1067, which had been heavily influenced by Morgenthau and his plan, as strictly as possible.

In 1948, Eisenhower became President of Columbia University. In December 1950, he took leave from the university when he became the Supreme Commander of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), and given operational command of NATO forces in Europe. Eisenhower retired from active service on May 31, 1952, and resumed the university presidency, which he held until January 1953.

1948 also was the year that Eisenhower's memoir, Crusade in Europe, was published. It is widely regarded as one of the finest U.S. military memoirs.

After his many wartime successes, Eisenhower was a great hero in the U.S. He was unusual for a military hero as he never saw the front line in his life. The nearest he came to being under enemy fire was in 1944 when a German fighter strafed the ground while he was inspecting troops in Normandy. Eisenhower dove for cover like everyone else and after the plane flew off, a British brigadier helped him up and seemed very relieved he was not hurt. When Eisenhower thanked him for his solicitude, the brigadier deflated him by explaining "my concern was that you should not be injured in my sector." 

Not long after his return in 1952, a "Draft Eisenhower" movement in the Republican party persuaded him to declare his candidacy in the 1952 presidential election to counter the candidacy of non-inteventionists Senator Robert Taft. (Eisenhower had been courted by both parties in 1948 and had declined to run then.) Eisenhower defeated Taft for the nomination but came to an agreement that Taft would stay out of foreign affairs while Eisenhower followed a conservative domestic policy. Eisenhower's campaign was a crusade against the Truman administration's policies regarding "Korea, Communism and Corruption" and was also noted for the simple but effective phrase "I Like Ike." Eisenhower promised to go to Korea himself and end the war and maintain both a strong NATO abroad against Communism and a corruption-free frugal administration at home. He and his running mate Richard Nixon, whose daughter later married Eisenhower's grandson David, defeated Democrats Adlai Stevenson and John Sparkman in a landslide, marking the first Republican return to the White House in 20 years. Eisenhower was the only general to serve as President in the 20th century, and the most recent President to have never held elected office prior to the Presidency. (The other Presidents not to have sought prior elected office were Zachary Taylor, Ulysses S. Grant, William Taft, and Herbert Hoover.)



Throughout his presidency, Eisenhower preached a doctrine of dynamic conservatism. He continued all the major New Deal programs still in operation, especially Social Security. He expanded its programs and rolled them into a new cabinet-level agency, the Department of Health, Education and Welfare, while extending benefits to an additional ten million workers. His cabinet, consisting of several corporate executives and one labor leader, was dubbed by one journalist, "Eight millionaires and a plumber."

Eisenhower won his second term in 1956 with 457 of 531 votes in the Electoral College, and 57.6% of the popular vote.



One of Eisenhower's enduring achievements was championing and signing the bill that authorized the Interstate Highway System in 1956. He justified the project through the Federal Aid Highway Act of 1956 as essential to American security during the Cold War. It was believed that large cities would be targets in a possible future war, and the highways were designed to evacuate them and allow the military to move in.

Eisenhower's goal to create improved highways was influenced by his involvement in the U.S. Army's 1919 Transcontinental Motor Convoy. He was assigned as an observer for the mission, which involved sending a convoy of U.S. Army vehicles coast to coast. His subsequent experience with German autobahns during World War II convinced him of the benefits of an Interstate Highway System. Noticing the improved ability to move logistics throughout the country, he thought an Interstate Highway System in the U.S. would not only be beneficial for military operations, but be the building block for continued economic growth.

After the Suez Crisis, the United States became the protector of most Western interests in the Middle East. As a result, Eisenhower proclaimed the "Eisenhower Doctrine" in January 1957. In relation to the Middle East, the U.S. would be "prepared to use armed force...[to counter] aggression from any country controlled by international communism." On July 15, 1958, he sent just under 15,000 soldiers to Lebanon (a combined force of Army and Marine Corps) as part of Operation Blue Bat, a non-combat peace keeping mission to stabilize the pro-Western government. They left the following October.

In addition, Eisenhower explored the option of supporting the French colonial forces in Vietnam who were fighting an independence insurrection there. However, Chief of Staff Matthew Ridgway dissuaded the President from intervening by presenting a comprehensive estimate of the massive military deployment that would be necessary.

Eisenhower supported the 1954 Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka U.S. Supreme Court decision, in which segregated ("separate but equal") schools were ruled to be unconstitutional. The very next day he told District of Columbia officials to make Washington a model for the rest of the country in integrating black and white public school children. He proposed to Congress the Civil Rights Acts of 1957 and 1960 and signed those acts into law. Although both Acts were weaker than subsequent civil rights legislation, they constituted the first significant civil rights acts since the 1870s.The "Little Rock Nine" incident of 1957 involved the refusal by Arkansas to honor a Federal court order to integrate the schools. Under , Eisenhower placed the Arkansas National Guard under Federal control and sent Army troops to escort nine black students into an all-white public school. The integration did not occur without violence. Eisenhower and Arkansas governor Orval Faubus engaged in tense arguments.

Eisenhower appointed the following Justices to the Supreme Court of the United States:



In 1961, Eisenhower became the first U.S. president to be "constitutionally forced" from office, having served the maximum two terms allowed by the 22nd Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. The amendment was ratified in 1951, during Harry S. Truman's term, but it stipulated that Truman would not be affected by the amendment.

Eisenhower was also the first outgoing President to come under the protection of the Former Presidents Act (two then living former Presidents, Herbert Hoover and Harry S. Truman, left office before Act was passed). Under the act, Eisenhower was entitled to receive a lifetime pension, state-provided staff and a Secret Service detail. 

In the 1960 election to choose his successor, Eisenhower endorsed his own Vice President, Republican Richard Nixon against Democrat John F. Kennedy. However, he only campaigned for Nixon in the campaign's final days and even did Nixon some harm. When asked by reporters at the end of a televised press conference to list one of Nixon's policy ideas he had adopted, he replied, "If you give me a week, I might think of one." Kennedy's campaign used the quote in one of its campaign commercials. Nixon lost narrowly to Kennedy.

On January 17, 1961, Eisenhower gave his final televised Address to the Nation from the Oval Office. In his farewell speech to the nation, Eisenhower raised the issue of the Cold War and role of the U.S. armed forces. He described the Cold War saying: "We face a hostile ideology global in scope, atheistic in character, ruthless in purpose and insidious in method..." and warned about what he saw as unjustified government spending proposals and continued with a warning that "we must guard against the acquisition of unwarranted influence, whether sought or unsought, by the military-industrial complex... Only an alert and knowledgeable citizenry can compel the proper meshing of the huge industrial and military machinery of defense with our peaceful methods and goals, so that security and liberty may prosper together."

Because of legal issues related to holding a military rank while in a civilian office, Eisenhower resigned his permanent commission as General of the Army before entering the office of President of the United States. Upon completion of his Presidential term, his commission on the retired list was reactivated and Eisenhower again was commissioned a five-star general in the United States Army.

Eisenhower retired to the place where he and Mamie had spent much of their post-war time, a working farm adjacent to the battlefield at Gettysburg, Pennsylvania. In 1967, the Eisenhowers donated the farm to the National Park Service and since 1980 it has been open to the public as the Eisenhower National Historic Site. In retirement, he did not completely retreat from political life; he spoke at the 1964 Republican National Convention and appeared with Barry Goldwater in a Republican campaign commercial from Gettysburg.

Eisenhower died of congestive heart failure on March 28, 1969 at Walter Reed Army Hospital in Washington D.C. The following day his body was moved to the Washington National Cathedral's Bethlehem Chapel where he lay in repose for twenty-eight hours. On March 30, his body was brought by caisson to the United States Capitol where he lay in state in the Capitol Rotunda. On March 31, Eisenhower's body was returned to the National Cathedral where he was given an Episcopal Church funeral service. That evening, Eisenhower's body was placed onto a train en route to Abilene, Kansas. His body arrived on April 2, and was interred later that day in a small chapel on the grounds of the Eisenhower Presidential Library. Eisenhower is buried alongside his son Doud who died at age 3 in 1921, and his wife, Mamie, who died in 1979.

After Eisenhower left office, his reputation declined and he was seen as having been a "do-nothing" President. This was partly because of the contrast between Eisenhower and his young activist successor, John F. Kennedy, but also because of his reluctance to support the civil rights movement to the degree that activists would have preferred, his handling of the 1960 U-2 incident, the Soviet Union's perceived leadership in the Arms race and the Space race, and his failure publicly to oppose McCarthyism, in particular his failure to defend George Marshall from attacks by Joseph McCarthy, though he privately deplored McCarthy's tactics and claims. Such omissions were held against him during the liberal climate of the 1960s and 1970s. Since that time, however, Eisenhower's reputation has risen. In recent surveys of historians, Eisenhower often is ranked in the top 10 among all US Presidents.

Eisenhower's picture was on the dollar coin from 1971 to 1978. Nearly 700 million of the copper-nickel clad coins were minted for general circulation, and far smaller numbers of uncirculated and proof issues (in both copper-nickel and 40% silver varieties) were produced for collectors. He reappeared on a commemorative silver dollar issued in 1990, celebrating the 100th anniversary of his birth, which with a double image of him showed his two roles, as both a soldier and a statesman. As part of the Presidential $1 Coin Program, Eisenhower will be featured on a gold-colored dollar coin in 2015.

He is remembered for ending the Korean War. USS ''Dwight D. Eisenhower'', the second ''Nimitz''-class supercarrier, was named in his honor.

The Eisenhower Expressway (Interstate 290), a  long expressway in the Chicago area, was renamed after him.

The British A4 class steam locomotive No. 4496 (renumbered 60008) Golden Shuttle was renamed Dwight D. Eisenhower in 1946. It is preserved at the National Railroad Museum in Green Bay, Wisconsin.

Eisenhower College was a small, liberal arts college chartered in Seneca Falls, New York in 1965, with classes beginning in 1968. Financial problems forced the school to fall under the management of the Rochester Institute of Technology in 1979. Its last class graduated in 1982.

The Eisenhower Medical Center in Rancho Mirage, California was named after the President in 1971.

The Dwight D. Eisenhower Army Medical Center, located at Fort Gordon near Augusta, Georgia, was named in his honor.

In February 1971, Dwight D. Eisenhower School of Freehold Township, New Jersey was officially opened.

The Eisenhower Tunnel was completed in 1979; it conveys westbound traffic on I-70 through the Continental Divide,  west of Denver, Colorado.

In 1983, The Eisenhower Institute was founded in Washington, D.C., as a policy institute to advance Eisenhower's intellectual and leadership legacies.

In 1999, the United States Congress created the Dwight D. Eisenhower Memorial Commission, which is in the planning stages of creating an enduring national memorial in Washington, D.C., across the street from the National Air and Space Museum on the National Mall.

On May 7, 2002, the Old Executive Office Building was officially renamed the Eisenhower Executive Office Building. This building is part of the White House Complex, west of the West Wing. It currently houses a number of executive offices, including ones for the Vice President and his or her spouse.

A county park in East Meadow, New York (Long Island) is named in his honor. In addition, Eisenhower State Park on Lake Texoma near his birthplace of Denison is named in his honor; his actual birthplace is currently operated by the State of Texas as Eisenhower Birthplace State Historic Site.

Many public high schools and middle schools in the U.S. are named after Eisenhower.

There is a Mount Eisenhower in the Presidential Range of the White Mountains in New Hampshire.

A tree overhanging the 17th hole that always gave him trouble at Augusta National, where he was a member, is named in his honor.

The Eisenhower Golf Club at the United States Air Force Academy, a 36-hole facility featuring the Blue and Silver courses and which is ranked #1 among DoD courses, is named in Eisenhower's honor.

In Order of Precedence

He was also an honorary member of the Boy Scouts of America's Tom Kita Chara Lodge #96.

List of citations bestowed by other countries.

Specific references:General references:













Christopher Columbus

His initial 1492 voyage came at a critical time of growing national imperialism and economic competition between developing nation states seeking wealth from the establishment of trade routes and colonies. In this sociopolitical climate, Columbus's far-fetched scheme won the attention of Queen Isabella of Spain. Severely underestimating the circumference of the Earth, he hypothesized that a westward route from Iberia to the Indies would be shorter and more direct than the overland trade route through Arabia. If true, this would allow Spain entry into the lucrative spice tradeheretofore commanded by the Arabs and Italians. Following his plotted course, he instead landed within the Bahamas Archipelago at a locale he named San Salvador. Mistaking the North-American island for the East-Asian mainland, he referred to its inhabitants as "Indians".

Academic consensus is that Columbus was born in Genoa, though there are other theories. The name Christopher Columbus is the Anglicisation of the Latin Christophorus Columbus. The name is rendered in modern Italian as Cristoforo Colombo, in Portuguese as Cristvo Colombo (formerly Christovam Colom), and in Spanish as Cristbal Coln.

The anniversary of Columbus' 1492 landing in the Americas (Columbus Day) is observed throughout the Americas and in Spain on October 12.

At age 14, he attended Prince Henry's school of navigation in Sagres, Portugal. He spoke a Genoese dialect. In one of his writings, Columbus claims to have gone to the sea at the age of 10. In 1470 the Columbus Family moved to Savona, where Domenico took over a tavern. In the same year, Columbus was on a Genoese ship hired in the service of Ren I of Anjou to support his attempt to conquer the Kingdom of Naples. 

In 1473 Columbus began his apprenticeship as business agent for the important Centurione, Di Negro and Spinola families of Genoa. Later he allegedly made a trip to Chios, a Genoese colony in the Aegean Sea. In May 1476, he took part in an armed convoy sent by Genoa to carry a valuable cargo to northern Europe. He docked in Bristol, Galway, in Ireland and was possibly in Iceland in 1477. In 1479 Columbus reached his brother Bartolomeo in Lisbon, keeping on trading for the Centurione family. He married Filipa Moniz Perestrello, daughter of the Porto Santo governor, the Portuguese nobleman of Genoese origin Bartolomeu Perestrello. In 1479 or 1480, his son, Diego, was born.



Europe had long enjoyed a safe land passage to China and India sources of valued goods such as silk, spices, and opiates under the hegemony of the Mongol Empire (the Pax Mongolica, or Mongol peace). With the Fall of Constantinople to the Ottoman Turks in 1453, the land route to Asia became more difficult. The Columbus brothers had a different idea. By the 1480s, they had developed a plan to travel to the Indies, then construed roughly as all of south and east Asia, by sailing directly west across the "Ocean Sea," i.e., the Atlantic.

Washington Irving's 1828 biography of Columbus popularized the idea that Columbus had difficulty obtaining support for his plan because Europeans thought the Earth was flat. In fact, the primitive maritime navigation of the time relied on the stars and the curvature of the spherical Earth. The knowledge that the Earth was spherical was widespread and the means of calculating its diameter using an astrolabe was known to both scholars and navigators. The spherical view of the earth had been the general opinion of Ancient Greek science, and continued as the standard view in the Middle Ages (for example of Bede in The Reckoning of Time). In fact the Earth had generally been believed to be spherical since the 4th century BCE by most scholars and almost all navigators, and Eratosthenes had measured the diameter of the Earth with good precision in the second century BC. Columbus put forth (incorrect) arguments based on a significantly smaller diameter for the Earth, claiming that Asia could be easily reached by sailing west across the Atlantic. Most scholars accepted Ptolemy's correct assessment that the terrestrial landmass (for Europeans of the time, comprising Eurasia and Africa) occupied 180 degrees of the terrestrial sphere, and correctly dismissed Columbus's claim that the Earth was much smaller, and that Asia was only a few thousand nautical miles to the west of Europe. Columbus' error was put down to his lack of experience in navigation at sea.

Columbus believed the (incorrect) calculations of Marinus of Tyre, putting the landmass at 225 degrees, leaving only 135 degrees of water. Moreover, Columbus believed that one degree represented a shorter distance on the earth's surface than was actually the case. Finally, he read maps as if the distances were calculated in Italian miles (1,238 meters). Accepting the length of a degree to be 56 miles, from the writings of Alfraganus, he therefore calculated the circumference of the Earth as 25,255 kilometers at most, and the distance from the Canary Islands to Japan as 3,000 Italian miles (3,700 km, or 2,300 statute miles) Columbus did not realize Al-Farghani used the much longer Arabic mile (about 1,830 m).

The main problem was that experts did not accept his estimate. The true circumference of the Earth is about 40,000 km (25,000 sm), a figure established by Eratosthenes in the second century BC, and the distance from the Canary Islands to Japan 19,600 km (12,200 sm). No ship that was readily available in the 15th century could carry enough food and fresh water for such a journey. Most European sailors and navigators concluded, likely correctly, that sailors undertaking a westward voyage from Europe to Asia non-stop would die of thirst or starvation long before reaching their destination. Spain, however, having completed an expensive war, was desperate for a competitive edge over other European countries in trade with the East Indies. Columbus promised such an advantage.

While Columbus' calculations underestimated the circumference of the Earth and the distance from the Canary Islands to Japan by the standards of his peers as well as in fact, almost all Europeans held the mistaken opinion that the aquatic expanse between Europe and Asia was uninterrupted. As the 16th century developed it was the route to America, rather than to Japan, that gave Spain a competitive edge in developing an overseas empire.

There was a further element of key importance in the plans of Columbus, a closely-held fact discovered by or otherwise learned by Columbus: the trade winds. A brisk wind from the east, commonly called an "easterly", propelled Santa Maria, La Nina, & La Pinta for 5 weeks from the Canaries. To return to Spain eastward against this prevailing wind would have required several months of an arduous sailing technique, called beating, during which food & drinkable water would have been utterly exhausted. Columbus returned home by following prevailing winds northeastward from the southern zone of the North Atlantic to the middle latitudes of the North Atlantic, where prevailing winds are eastward (westerly) to the coastlines of Western Europe, where the winds curve southward towards the Iberian Peninsula. In fact, Columbus was wrong about degrees of longitude to be traversed and wrong about distance per degree, but he was right about a more vital fact: how to use the North Atlantic's great circular wind pattern, clockwise in direction, to get home. 

Some mean that his confidence in that land was within reach, was based on his travel in 1477 (1476-1477), which may have taken him to Baffin Island at 73 degrees north (in German). On this tour he could also get information from norse sailors and inuit kayakers trading on the long coast extending from north to south at about this longitude, almost to Africa. A History of Norway..., 12th century p. 3, lines 2-5: This country, which was discovered, settled and confirmed in the universal faith by Icelanders, is the western boundary of Europe, almost touching the African islands where the waters of ocean flood in.

In 1485, Columbus presented his plans to John II, King of Portugal. He proposed the king equip three sturdy ships and grant Columbus one year's time to sail out into the Atlantic, search for a western route to Orient, and then return home. Columbus also requested he be made "Great Admiral of the Ocean", created governor of any and all lands he discovered, and given one-tenth of all revenue from those lands discovered. The king submitted the proposal to his experts, who rejected it. It was their considered opinion that Columbus' proposed route of  was, in fact, far too short.



In 1488 Columbus appealed to the court of Portugal once again, and once again John invited him to an audience. It too was to come to nothing, for not long afterwards came the arrival of Portugal's native son Bartholomeu Dias from a successful rounding of the southern tip of Africa. Portugal was no longer interested in trailblazing a western route to the East. 

Columbus travelled from Portugal once more to both Genoa and Venice, but he received encouragement from neither. Previously he had his brother sound out Henry VII of England, to see if the English monarch might not be more amenable to Columbus' proposal. After much carefully considered hesitation Henry's invitation came, too late. Columbus had already committed himself to Spain.



He had sought an audience from the monarchs Ferdinand II of Aragon and Isabella I of Castile, who had united the largest kingdoms of Spain by marrying, and were ruling together. On May 1, 1486, permission having been granted, Columbus laid his plans before Queen Isabella, who, in turn, referred it to a committee. After the passing of much time, these savants of Spain, like their counterparts in Portugal, reported back that Columbus had judged the distance to Asia much too short. They pronounced the idea impractical, and advised their Royal Highnesses to pass on the proposed venture.

However, to keep Columbus from taking his ideas elsewhere, and perhaps to keep their options open, the King and Queen of Spain gave him an annual annuity of 12,000 maravedis ($840) and in 1489 furnished him with a letter ordering all Spanish cities and towns to provide him food and lodging at no cost.

After continually lobbying at the Spanish court and two years of negotiations, he finally had success in 1492. Ferdinand and Isabella had just conquered Granada, the last Muslim stronghold on the Iberian peninsula, and they received Columbus in Crdoba, in the Alczar castle. Isabella turned Columbus down on the advice of her confessor, and he was leaving town in despair, when Ferdinand intervened. Isabella then sent a royal guard to fetch him and Ferdinand later rightfully claimed credit for being "the principal cause why those islands were discovered". King Ferdinand is referred to as "losing his patience" in this issue, but this cannot be proven.

About half of the financing was to come from private Italian investors, whom Columbus had already lined up. Financially broke after the Granada campaign, the monarchs left it to the royal treasurer to shift funds among various royal accounts on behalf of the enterprise. Columbus was to be made "Admiral of the Seas" and would receive a portion of all profits. The terms were unusually generous, but as his own son later wrote, the monarchs did not really expect him to return.

According to the contract that Columbus made with King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella, if Columbus discovered any new islands or mainland, he would receive many high rewards. In terms of power, he would be given the rank of Admiral of the Ocean Sea (Atlantic Ocean) and appointed Viceroy and Governor of all the new lands. He had the right to nominate three persons, from whom the sovereigns would choose one, for any office in the new lands. He would be entitled to 10 percent of all the revenues from the new lands in perpetuity; this part was denied to him in the contract, although it was one of his demands.Finally, he would also have the option of buying one-eighth interest in any commercial venture with the new lands and receive one-eighth of the profits.

Columbus was later arrested in 1500 and supplanted from these posts. After his death, Columbus's sons, Diego and Fernando, took legal action to enforce their father's contract. Many of the smears against Columbus were initiated by the Spanish crown during these lengthy court cases, known as the pleitos colombinos. The family had some success in their first litigation, as a judgment of 1511 confirmed Diego's position as Viceroy, but reduced his powers. Diego resumed litigation in 1512, which lasted until 1536, and further disputes continued until 1790.

On the evening of August 3, 1492, Columbus departed from Palos de la Frontera with three ships; one larger carrack, Santa Mara, nicknamed Gallega (the Galician), and two smaller caravels, Pinta (the Painted) and Santa Clara, nicknamed Nia after her owner Juan Nio of Moguer. They were property of Juan de la Cosa and the Pinzn brothers (Martin Alonzo and Vicente Yez), but the monarchs forced the Palos inhabitants to contribute to the expedition. Columbus first sailed to the Canary Islands, which were owned by Castile, where he restocked the provisions and made repairs, and on September 6, he started what turned out to be a five-week voyage across the ocean. 

Land was sighted at 2 a.m. on October 12, 1492, by a sailor named Rodrigo de Triana (also known as Juan Rodrguez Bermejo) aboard Pinta. Columbus called the island (in what is now The Bahamas) San Salvador; the natives called it Guanahani. Exactly which island in the Bahamas this corresponds to is an unresolved topic; prime candidates are Samana Cay, Plana Cays, or San Salvador Island (named San Salvador in 1925 in the belief that it was Columbus's San Salvador). The indigenous people he encountered, the Lucayan, Tano or Arawak, were peaceful and friendly. From the October 12, 1492 entry in his journal he wrote of them, "Many of the men I have seen have scars on their bodies, and when I made signs to them to find out how this happened, they indicated that people from other nearby islands come to San Salvador to capture them; they defend themselves the best they can. I believe that people from the mainland come here to take them as slaves. They ought to make good and skilled servants, for they repeat very quickly whatever we say to them. I think they can very easily be made Christians, for they seem to have no religion. If it pleases our Lord, I will take six of them to Your Highnesses when I depart, in order that they may learn our language." Lacking modern weaponry and even metal-forged swords or pikes, he remarked upon their tactical vulnerability, writing, "I could conquer the whole of them with 50 men, and govern them as I pleased." 

Columbus also explored the northeast coast of Cuba (landed on October 28) and the northern coast of Hispaniola, by December 5. Here, the Santa Maria ran aground on Christmas morning 1492 and had to be abandoned. He was received by the native cacique Guacanagari, who gave him permission to leave some of his men behind. Columbus left 39 men and founded the settlement of La Navidad in what is now present-day Haiti. Before returning to Spain, Columbus also kidnapped some ten to twenty-five natives and took them back with him. Only seven or eight of the native Indians arrived in Spain alive, but they made quite an impression on Seville.

Columbus headed for Spain, but another storm forced him into Lisbon. He anchored next to the King's harbor patrol ship on March 4, 1493 in Portugal. After spending more than one week in Portugal, he set sail for Spain. He reached Spain on March 15, 1493. Word of his finding new lands rapidly spread throughout Europe.

There is increasing modern scientific evidence that this voyage also brought syphilis back from the New World. Many of the crew members who served on this voyage later joined the army of King Charles VIII in his invasion of Italy in 1495 resulting in the spreading of the disease across Europe and as many as 5 million deaths.



Columbus left Cdiz, Spain, on September 24, 1493 to find new territories, with 17 ships carrying supplies, and about 1,200 men to colonize the region. On October 13, the ships left the Canary Islands as they had on the first voyage, following a more southerly course.

On November 3, 1493, Columbus sighted a rugged island that he named Dominica (Latin for Sunday); later that day, he landed at Marie-Galante, which he named Santa Maria la Galante. After sailing past Les Saintes (Los Santos, The Saints), he arrived at Guadeloupe (Santa Mara de Guadalupe de Extremadura, after the image of the Virgin Mary venerated at the Spanish monastery of Villuercas, in Guadalupe, Spain), which he explored between November 4 and November 10, 1493.

The exact course of his voyage through the Lesser Antilles is debated, but it seems likely that he turned north, sighting and naming several islands, including Montserrat (for Santa Maria de Montserrate, after the Blessed Virgin of the Monastery of Montserrat, which is located on the Mountain of Montserrat, in Catalonia, Spain), Antigua (after a church in Seville, Spain, called Santa Maria la Antigua, meaning "Old St. Mary's"), Redonda (for Santa Maria la Redonda, Spanish for "round", owing to the island's shape), Nevis (derived from the Spanish, Nuestra Seora de las Nieves, meaning "Our Lady of the Snows", because Columbus thought the clouds over Nevis Peak made the island resemble a snow-capped mountain), Saint Kitts (for St. Christopher, patron of sailors and travelers), Sint Eustatius (for the early Roman martyr, St. Eustachius), Saba (also for St. Christopher?), Saint Martin (San Martin), and Saint Croix (from the Spanish Santa Cruz, meaning "Holy Cross"). He also sighted the island chain of the Virgin Islands (and named them Islas de Santa Ursula y las Once Mil Virgenes, Saint Ursula and the 11,000 Virgins, a cumbersome name that was usually shortened, both on maps of the time and in common parlance, to Islas Virgenes), and he also named the islands of Virgin Gorda (the fat virgin), Tortola, and Peter Island (San Pedro).

He continued to the Greater Antilles, and landed at Puerto Rico (originally San Juan Bautista, in honor of Saint John the Baptist, a name that was later supplanted by Puerto Rico (English: Rich Port) while the capital retained the name, San Juan) on November 19, 1493. One of the first skirmishes between native Americans and Europeans since the time of the Vikings took place when Columbus's men rescued two boys who had just been castrated by their captors.

On November 22, Columbus returned to Hispaniola, where he intended to visit Fuerte de la Navidad (Christmas Fort), built during his first voyage, and located on the northern coast of Haiti; Fuerte de la Navidad was found in ruins, destroyed by the native Taino people, whereupon, Columbus moved more than 100 kilometers eastwards, establishing a new settlement, which he called La Isabela, likewise on the northern coast of Hispaniola, in the present-day Dominican Republic. However, La Isabela proved to be a poorly-chosen location, and the settlement was short-lived.

He left Hispaniola on April 24, 1494, arrived at Cuba (naming it Juana) on April 30. He explored the southern coast of Cuba, which he believed to be a peninsula rather than an island, and several nearby islands, including the Isle of Pines (Isla de las Pinas, later known as La Evangelista, The Evangelist). He reached Jamaica on May 5. He retraced his route to Hispaniola, arriving on August 20, before he finally returned to Spain.

During his second voyage, Columbus and his men instituted a policy in Hispaniola which has been referred to by numerous historians as genocide. The native Taino people of the island were systematically enslaved and murdered. Hundreds were rounded up and shipped to Europe to be sold; many died en route. For the rest of the population, Columbus demanded that all Taino under his control should bring the Spaniards gold. Those that didn't were to have their hands cut off. Since there was, in fact, little gold to be had, the Taino fled, and the Spaniards hunted them down and killed them. The Taino tried to mount a resistance, but the Spanish weaponry was superior, and European diseases ravaged their population. In despair, the Taino engaged in mass suicide, even killing their own children to save them from the Spaniards. Within two years, half of what may have been 250,000 Taino were dead. The remainder were taken as slaves and set to work on plantations, where the mortality rate was very high. By 1550, 60 years after Columbus landed, only a few hundred Taino were left on their island. In another hundred years, perhaps only a handful remained.



On May 30, 1498, Columbus left with six ships from Sanlcar, Spain, for his third trip to the New World. He was accompanied by the young Bartolom de Las Casas, who would later provide partial transcripts of Columbus' logs. 

Columbus led the fleet to the Portuguese island of Porto Santo, his wife's native land. He then sailed to Madeira and spent some time there with the Portuguese captain Joo Gonalves da Camara before sailing to the Canary Islands and Cape Verde. Columbus landed on the south coast of the island of Trinidad on July 31. From August 4 through August 12, he explored the Gulf of Paria which separates Trinidad from Venezuela. He explored the mainland of South America, including the Orinoco River. He also sailed to the islands of Chacachacare and Margarita Island and sighted and named Tobago (Bella Forma) and Grenada (Concepcion). 

Columbus returned to Hispaniola on August 19 to find that many of the Spanish settlers of the new colony were discontented, having been misled by Columbus about the supposedly bountiful riches of the new world. An entry in his journal from September 1498 reads, "From here one might send, in the name of the Holy Trinity, as many slaves as could be sold..." Indeed, as a fierce supporter of slavery, Columbus ultimately refused to baptize the native people of Hispanolia, since Catholic law forbade the enslavement of Christians. 

Columbus repeatedly had to deal with rebellious settlers and natives.  He had some of his crew hanged for disobeying him. A number of returning settlers and sailors lobbied against Columbus at the Spanish court, accusing him and his brothers of gross mismanagement. On his return he was arrested for a period (see Governorship and arrest section below).

Columbus made a fourth voyage nominally in search of the Strait of Malacca to the Indian Ocean. Accompanied by his brother Bartolomeo and his 13-year-old son Fernando, he left Cdiz, Spain, on May 11, 1502, with the ships Capitana, Gallega, Vizcana and Santiago de Palos. He sailed to Arzila on the Moroccan coast to rescue Portuguese soldiers whom he had heard were under siege by the Moors. On June 15, they landed at Carbet on the island of Martinique (Martinica). A hurricane was brewing, so he continued on, hoping to find shelter on Hispaniola. He arrived at Santo Domingo on June 29, but was denied port, and the new governor refused to listen to his storm prediction. Instead, while Columbus' ships sheltered at the mouth of the Rio Jaina, the first Spanish treasure fleet sailed into the hurricane. Columbus' ships survived with only minor damage, while twenty-nine of the thirty ships in the governor's fleet were lost to the July 1 storm. In addition to the ships, 500 lives (including that of the governor, Francisco de Bobadilla) and an immense cargo of gold were surrendered to the sea. 

After a brief stop at Jamaica, Columbus sailed to Central America, arriving at Guanaja (Isla de Pinos) in the Bay Islands off the coast of Honduras on July 30. Here Bartolomeo found native merchants and a large canoe, which was described as "long as a galley" and was filled with cargo. On August 14, he landed on the American mainland at Puerto Castilla, near Trujillo, Honduras. He spent two months exploring the coasts of Honduras, Nicaragua, and Costa Rica, before arriving in Almirante Bay, Panama on October 16.

On December 5, 1502, Columbus and his crew found themselves in a storm unlike any they had ever experienced. In his journal Columbus writes,For nine days I was as one lost, without hope of life. Eyes never beheld the sea so angry, so high, so covered with foam. The wind not only prevented our progress, but offered no opportunity to run behind

any headland for shelter; hence we were forced to keep out in this bloodyocean, seething like a pot on a hot fire. Never did the sky look more terrible; for one whole day and night it blazed like a furnace, and the lightning broke with such violence that each time I wondered if it had carried off my spars and sails; the flashes came with such fury and frightfulness that we all thought that the ship would be blasted. Allthis time the water never ceased to fall from the sky; I do not say it rained, for it was like another deluge. The men were so worn out that they longed for death to end their dreadful suffering.

In Panama, Columbus learned from the natives of gold and a strait to another ocean. After much exploration, in January 1503 he established a garrison at the mouth of the Rio Belen. On April 6 one of the ships became stranded in the river. At the same time, the garrison was attacked, and the other ships were damaged. Columbus left for Hispaniola on April 16, heading north. On May 10 he sighted the Cayman Islands, naming them "Las Tortugas" after the numerous sea turtles there. His ships next sustained more damage in a storm off the coast of Cuba. Unable to travel farther, on June 25, 1503, they were beached in St. Ann's Bay, Jamaica.For a year Columbus and his men remained stranded on Jamaica. A Spaniard, Diego Mendez, and some natives paddled a canoe to get help from Hispaniola. That island's governor, Nicols de Ovando y Cceres, detested Columbus and obstructed all efforts to rescue him and his men. In the meantime Columbus, in a desperate effort to induce the natives to continue provisioning him and his hungry men, successfully intimidated the natives by correctly predicting a lunar eclipse for February 29, 1504, using the Ephemeris of the German astronomer Regiomontanus. Help finally arrived, no thanks to the governor, on June 29, 1504, and Columbus and his men arrived in Sanlcar, Spain, on November 7.

During Columbus' stint as governor and viceroy, he had been accused of governing tyrannically. . Columbus was physically and mentally exhausted; his body was wracked by arthritis and his eyes by ophthalmia. In October 1499, he sent two ships to Spain, asking the Court of Spain to appoint a royal commissioner to help him govern.

The Court appointed Francisco de Bobadilla, a member of the Order of Calatrava; however, his authority stretched far beyond what Columbus had requested. Bobadilla was given total control as governor from 1500 until his death in 1502. Arriving in Santo Domingo while Columbus was away, Bobadilla was immediately peppered with complaints about all three Columbus brothers: Christopher, Bartolom, and Diego. Consuelo Varela, a Spanish historian, states: "Even those who loved him [Columbus] had to admit the atrocities that had taken place." 

As a result of these testimonies and without being allowed a word in his own defense, Columbus upon his return, had manacles placed on his arms and chains on his feet and was cast into prison to await return to Spain. He was 53 years old. 

On October 1, 1500, Columbus and his two brothers, likewise in chains, were sent back to Spain. Once in Cdiz, a grieving Columbus wrote to a friend at court:

It is now seventeen years since I came to serve these princes with the Enterprise of the Indies. They made me pass eight of them in discussion, and at the end rejected it as a thing of jest. Nevertheless I persisted therein... Over there I have placed under their sovereignty more land than there is in Africa and Europe, and more than 1,700 islands... In seven years I, by the divine will, made that conquest. At a time when I was entitled to expect rewards and retirement, I was incontinently arrested and sent home loaded with chains... The accusation was brought out of malice on the basis of charges made by civilians who had revolted and wished to take possession on the land....

I beg your graces, with the zeal of faithful Christians in whom their Highnesses have confidence, to read all my papers, and to consider how I, who came from so far to serve these princes... now at the end of my days have been despoiled of my honor and my property without cause, wherein is neither justice nor mercy.

According to testimony of 23 witnesses during his trial, Columbus regularly used barbaric acts of torture to govern Hispaniola.

Columbus and his brothers lingered in jail for six weeks before the busy King Ferdinand ordered their release. Not long thereafter, the king and queen summoned the Columbus brothers to their presence at the Alhambra palace in Granada. There the royal couple heard the brothers' pleas; restored their freedom and their wealth; and, after much persuasion, agreed to fund Columbus' fourth voyage. But the door was firmly shut on Christopher Columbus's role as governor. From that point forward, Nicols de Ovando y Cceres was to be the new governor of the West Indies.



While Columbus had always given the conversion of non-believers as one reason for his explorations, he grew increasingly religious in his later years. He claimed to hear divine voices, lobbied for a new crusade to capture Jerusalem, often wore Franciscan habit, and described his explorations to the "paradise" as part of God's plan which would soon result in the Last Judgment and the end of the world.

In his later years, Columbus demanded that the Spanish Crown give him 10 per cent of all profits made in the new lands, pursuant to earlier agreements. Because he had been relieved of his duties as governor, the crown did not feel bound by these contracts, and his demands were rejected. After his death his family later sued for part of the profits from trade with America in the pleitos colombinos.

On May 20, 1506, at about the age of 55, Columbus died in Valladolid, fairly wealthy from the gold his men had accumulated in Hispaniola. When he died he was still convinced that his journeys had been along the east coast of Asia. According to a study, published in February 2007, by Antonio Rodriguez Cuartero, Department of Internal Medicine of the University of Granada, he died of a heart attack caused by Reiter's Syndrome (also called reactive arthritis). According to his personal diaries and notes by contemporaries, the symptoms of this illness (burning pain during urination, pain and swelling of the knees, and conjunctivitis of the eyes) were clearly visible in his last three years.

His remains were first buried in Valladolid and then at the monastery of La Cartuja in Seville (southern Spain), by the will of his son Diego, who had been governor of Hispaniola. Then in 1542, his remains were transferred to Santo Domingo, in eastern Hispaniola. In 1795, the French took over Hispaniola, and his remains were moved to Havana, Cuba. After Cuba became independent following the Spanish-American War in 1898, his remains were moved back to the Cathedral of Seville in Spain, where they were placed on an elaborate catafalque. However, a lead box bearing an inscription identifying "Don Christopher Columbus" and containing fragments of bone and a bullet was discovered at Santo Domingo in 1877. 

To lay to rest claims that the wrong relics were moved to Havana and that the remains of Columbus were left buried in the cathedral of Santo Domingo, DNA samples were taken in June 2003 (History Today August 2003). The results are not conclusive. Initial observations suggested that the bones did not appear to belong to somebody with the physique or age at death associated with Columbus. DNA extraction proved difficult; only a few limited fragments of mitochondrial DNA could be isolated. However, such as they are, these do appear to match corresponding DNA from Columbus's brother, giving support to the idea that the two had the same mother and that the body therefore may be that of Columbus. The authorities in Santo Domingo have not allowed the remains there to be exhumed, so it is unknown if any of those remains could be from Columbus's body. The location of the Dominican remains is in the "Columbus Lighthouse" or Faro A Colon which is in Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic.



Sometimes thought of erroneously as the discoverer of the New World, Columbus was preceded by the various cultures and civilizations of the indigenous peoples of the Americas, as well as the Western world's Vikings. He is regarded more accurately as the person who brought the Americas into the forefront of Western attention. "Columbus' claim to fame isn't that he got there first," explains historian Martin Dugard, "it's that he stayed." Equally false is the notion that he was first to envision a rounded earth. This was known in ancient times, though largely forgotten in the Middle Ages. By Columbus's day, educated men were in agreement as to its spherical shape, even if many or most people believed otherwise. More contentious was the size of the earth, and whether it was possible in practical terms to cross such a vast body of water: the longest any ship (European or otherwise) had gone without making landfall did not much exceed 30 days when Columbus embarked on his first audacious voyage.

Amerigo Vespucci's travel journals, published 1502-4, convinced Martin Waldseemller that the discovered place was not India, as Columbus always believed, but a new continent, and in 1507, a year after Columbus' death, Waldseemller published a world map calling the new continent America from Vespucci's Latinized name "Americus". 

Historically, the British had downplayed Columbus and emphasized the role of John Cabot as a pioneering explorer. But for the emerging United States, Cabot made a poor national hero. Veneration of Columbus in America dates back to colonial times. America itself was sometimes referred to as Columbia. The use of Columbus as a founding figure of New World nations and the use of the word Columbia spread rapidly after the American Revolution. During the last two decades of the 18th century the name "Columbia" was given to the federal capital District of Columbia, South Carolina's new capital city, Columbia, South Carolina, the Columbia River, and numerous other places. Attempts to rename the United States "Columbia" failed, but Columbia became a female national personification of America, similar to the male Uncle Sam. Outside the United States the name was used in 1819 for the Republic of Colombia, a precursor of the modern nation of Colombia.

A candidate for sainthood in the Catholic Church in 1866, Celebration of Columbus' legacy perhaps reached a zenith in 1892 when the 400th anniversary of his first arrival in the Americas occurred. Monuments to Columbus like the Columbian Exposition in Chicago were erected throughout the United States and Latin America extolling him. Numerous cities, towns, counties, and streets have been named after him, including the capital cities of two U.S. states (Columbus, Ohio and Columbia, South Carolina). 

In 1909, descendants of Columbus undertook to dismantle the Columbus family chapel in Spain and move it to a site near State College, Pennsylvania, where it may now be visited by the public. At the museum associated with the chapel, there are a number of Columbus relics worthy of note, including the armchair which the "Admiral of the Ocean Sea" used at his chart table.

Culpability is sometimes placed on contemporary governments and their citizens for the hardship suffered by Native Americans during the time of Christopher Columbus. Columbus myths and celebrations are generally a positive affair, making less room for this concept in history books. Christopher Columbus was strongly criticised in a song by Jamaican artiste Burning Spear titled 'A Damn Blasted Liar.' The controversial song opened a strong opinionated debate across much of the Caribbean region on the effects that Christopher Columbus and his leadership had on the region's native peoples.

The Spanish colonization of the Americas, and the subsequent effects on the native peoples, were dramatized in the 1992 feature film  to commemorate the 500th anniversary of his landing in the Americas. *In 2003, Venezuelan President Hugo Chvez urged Native American Latin Americans to not celebrate the Columbus Day holiday. Chavez blamed Columbus for leading the way in the mass genocide of the Native Americans by the Spanish.

Although an abundance of artwork involving Christopher Columbus exists, no authentic contemporary portrait has been found. There is a portrait painted by Alejo Fernndez, between 1505 and 1536, titled Virgen de los Navegantes in the Royal Alcazar in Seville. At the 1893 World's Columbian Exposition, 71 alleged portraits of Columbus were displayed, most did not match contemporary descriptions. These writings describe him as having reddish hair, which turned to white early in his life, light colored eyes, as well as being a lighter skinned person with too much sun exposure turning his face red. 

In keeping with descriptions of Columbus having had auburn hair or (later) white hair, textbooks use the Sebastiano del Piombo painting (which in its normal-sized resolution shows Columbus's hair as auburn) so often that it has become the iconic image of Columbus accepted by popular culture.

Colombus is a significant historical figure and has been depicted in fiction and in popular films and television. 

In 1991, author Salman Rushdie published a fictional representation of Columbus in The New Yorker, "Christopher Columbus and Queen Isabella of Spain Consummate Their Relationship, Santa Fe, January, 1492," (The New Yorker, June 17, 1991, p. 32). In  (1996) science fiction novelist Orson Scott Card focuses on Columbus' life and activities, but the novel's action also deals with a group of scientists from the future who travel back to the 15th century with the goal of changing the pattern of European contact with the Americas. British author Stephen Baxter includes Columbus' quest for royal sponsorship as a crucial historical event in his 2007 science fiction novel Navigator (ISBN 978-0-441-01559-7), the third entry in the author's Time's Tapestry Series. American author Mark Twain based the time traveller's trick in A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur's Court on Columbus's sucessful prediction of a lunar eclipse on his fourth voyage to the new world.

Columbus has also been portrayed in cinema and television, including mini-series, films and cartoons. Most notably he was portrayed by Grard Depardieu in 1992 film by Ridley Scott . Scott presented Columbus as an idealist as opposed to the view that he was ruthless and responsible for the misfortune of Native Americans. As in many of Scott's movies, the character is presented as having some ideas that weren't current at his time. 

Other more recent productions include TV mini-series Christopher Columbus (1985) with Gabriel Byrne as Colombus, , a 1992 biopic film by Alexander Salkind, Christopher Columbus, a 1949 film starring Fredric March as Columbus, and comedy Carry On Columbus (1992).













Billy Crystal

William Edward "Billy" Crystal (born March 14, 1948) is an American Golden Globe Award-nominated and Emmy Award-winning actor, writer, producer, comedian, and film director. He gained prominence in the 1970s for playing Jodie Dallas on the ABC sitcom Soap and became a Hollywood film star during the late 1980s and 1990s, appearing in the box office successes When Harry Met Sally... and City Slickers. 

Crystal was born in the Doctor's Hospital in Manhattan and grew up in Long Beach, New York, the son of Helen (ne Gabler), a housewife, and Jack Crystal, a record company executive and producer of jazz records, who owned and operated the Commodore Record store. His uncle was musician and songwriter Milt Gabler, and his brother, Richard Crystal, is a television producer. Crystal grew up in a Jewish family that he has described as "large" and "loving". After graduation from Long Beach High School, Crystal attended Marshall University in Huntington, West Virginia, on a baseball scholarship, having learned the game from his father, who pitched for St. John's University. Crystal never played a game at Marshall because the program was suspended during his freshman year and he didn't return as a sophomore, staying back in New York with his future wife. Later, he attended New York University and Nassau Community College. 

Crystal has been married to Janice Goldfinger, whom he met when he was 18 and she 17, since 1970. They have two daughters, actresses Jennifer and Lindsay, and are now grandparents. They reside in Pacific Palisades, California.

Crystal returned to New York and performed regularly at The Improv and Catch a Rising Star. He studied film and television direction under Martin Scorsese at New York University. Crystal's earliest prominent role was as Jodie Dallas on Soap, one of the first gay characters portrayed on American television. In 1976, Crystal appeared on an episode of All in the Family. He was scheduled to appear on the first episode of Saturday Night Live (October 11, 1975), but his sketch was cut. He did do a stand-up bit later on that first season as "Bill Crystal", on the April 17, 1976, episode. After hosting a show years later, in 1984, he joined the cast. His most famous recurring sketch was his parody of Fernando Lamas Fernando, a smarmy talk show host whose catch phrase, "You look... mahvelous!," became a media sensation.

Crystal's first film role was in Joan Rivers's 1978 film Rabbit Test. Crystal also made game show appearances such as The Hollywood Squares and The $20,000 Pyramid. He holds the record for getting his contestant partner to the top of the pyramid in the bonus round in the fastest time, 26 seconds. 

Crystal hosted the Academy Awards broadcast in 1990–1993, 1997, 1998, 2000, and 2004; and he reportedly turned down the opportunity to host the 2006 ceremony to concentrate on his one-man show, 700 Sundays. His eight times as the emcee is second only to legendary Oscar host Bob Hope in most ceremonies hosted.

Crystal appeared briefly in Rob Reiner's 1984 "rockumentary" This Is Spinal Tap as Morty The Mime, a waiter dressed as a mime at one of Spinal Tap's parties. He shared the scene with a then-unknown, non-speaking Dana Carvey. Crystal's memorable line in the film was "Mime is money." Eventually, Reiner directed Crystal again in The Princess Bride, and then in the romantic comedy When Harry Met Sally..., for which Crystal was nominated for a Golden Globe. Crystal also appeared in the box-office hit City Slickers (1991).

Crystal wrote, directed, and starred in Mr. Saturday Night (1992) and Forget Paris (1995). In the former, Crystal played a serious role in aging makeup, as an egotistical comedian who reflects back on his career. He directed the made-for-television movie 61* (2001) based on Roger Maris's and Mickey Mantle's race to break Babe Ruth's single-season home run record in 1961. This earned Crystal an Emmy nomination for Outstanding Directing for a Miniseries, Movie or a Special.

Crystal has continued working in film, including the popular Analyze This (1999) and Analyze That (2002) with Robert De Niro. Crystal lent his voice to the character Mike Wazowski in Pixar's animated feature film Monsters, Inc., and in the English version of Howl's Moving Castle as the voice of Calcifer. Pixar originally approached him to provide the voice of Buzz Lightyear in Toy Story. He turned down that offer, but regretted it after the film became one of the most popular releases of the year.

Crystal won the 2005 Tony Award for Best Special Theatrical Event for 700 Sundays, a two-act, one-man play, which he conceived and wrote about his parents and his childhood growing up on Long Island. He toured the U.S. with the show in 2006 and Australia in 2007.

Following the initial success of the play, Crystal wrote the book 700 Sundays for Warner Books, which was published on October 31, 2005. In conjunction with the book and the play that also paid tribute to his uncle, Milt Gabler, Crystal produced two CD compilations: Billy Crystal Presents: The Milt Gabler Story, which featured his uncle's most influential recordings from Billie Holiday's "Strange Fruit" to "Rock Around the Clock" by Bill Haley & His Comets; and Billy Remembers Billie featuring Crystal's favorite Holiday recordings.

In 1986, Crystal started hosting Comic Relief on HBO with Robin Williams and Whoopi Goldberg. Founded by Bob Zmuda, Comic Relief raises money for homeless people in the United States.

On September 6, 2005, on The Tonight Show, Crystal and Jay Leno were the first celebrities to sign a Harley-Davidson motorcycle to be auctioned off for Gulf Coast relief.

Crystal has also participated in the Simon Wiesenthal Center Museum of Tolerance in Los Angeles. Portraying himself in a video, Crystal introduces museum guests to the genealogy wing of the museum.

On March 12, , Crystal signed a minor league contract, for a single day, to play with the New York Yankees, and was invited to the team's major league spring training. Billy wore uniform number 60, in honor of his upcoming 60th birthday. On March 13, in a spring training game against the Pittsburgh Pirates, Crystal led off as the designated hitter. He managed to make contact, fouling a fastball up the first base line, but was eventually struck out by Pirates pitcher Paul Maholm on 6 pitches and was later replaced in the batting order by Johnny Damon. He was released on March 14, his 60th birthday.

In addition to his Golden Globe Award-nominations, Emmy Awards, and Tony Award, Crystal is the 2007 recipient of the Mark Twain Prize for American Humor.













Elvis Presley

In 1954, Presley began his career as one of the first performers of rockabilly, an uptempo fusion of country and rhythm and blues with a strong back beat. His novel versions of existing songs, mixing "black" and "white" sounds, made him popular—and controversial—as did his uninhibited stage and television performances. He recorded songs in the rock and roll genre, with tracks like "Hound Dog" and "Jailhouse Rock" later embodying the style. Presley had a versatile voice and had unusually wide success encompassing other genres, including gospel, blues, ballads and pop. To date, he has been inducted into four music halls of fame.

In the 1960s, Presley made the majority of his thirty-one movies—mainly poorly reviewed, but financially successful, musicals. In 1968, he returned with acclaim to live music in a television special, and thereafter performed across the U.S., notably in Las Vegas. Throughout his career, he set records for concert attendance, television ratings and recordings sales. He is one of the best-selling and most influential artists in the history of popular music. Health problems, drug dependency and other factors led to his premature death at age 42.

Elvis Presley was of mixed ancestry. His father, Vernon (April 10, 1916–June 26, 1979), had several low-paying jobs, including sharecropper and truck driver. His mother, Gladys Love Smith (April 25, 1912 – August 14, 1958) worked as a sewing machinist. They met in Tupelo, Mississippi, and eloped to Pontotoc County where they married on June 17, 1933.

Presley's ancestry is discussed at the following sites:

Presley was born in a two-room shotgun house, built by his father, in East Tupelo. He was an identical twin—his brother was stillborn and given the name Jesse Garon. Growing up as an only child he "was, everyone agreed, unusually close to his mother." The family lived just above the poverty line and attended an Assembly of God church. Vernon has been described as "a malingerer, always averse to work and responsibility." His wife was "voluble, lively, full of spunk" and had a fondness for drink. In 1938, Vernon was jailed for an eight dollar check forgery. His incarceration caused Gladys and her son to lose the family home, and they had to move in with relatives.

In September 1942, Presley entered first grade at Lawhorn School in Tupelo. Presley was sometimes bullied; classmates threw "things at him—rotten fruit and stuff—because he was different... he stuttered and he was a mama's boy." Despite this, he was considered a "well-mannered and quiet child".

On October 3, 1945, at age ten, he made his first public performance in a singing contest at the Mississippi-Alabama Fair and Dairy Show at the suggestion of his teacher Mrs. J.C. Grimes. Dressed as a cowboy, the young Presley had to stand on a chair to reach the microphone and sang Red Foley's "Old Shep." He came second, winning $5 and a free ticket to all the Fair rides.

In 1946, for his eleventh birthday, Presley received his first guitar. He had wanted a bicycle or rifle for his birthday, but his parents could only afford a guitar. Over the following year, Vernon's brother, Vester, gave Elvis basic guitar lessons. In September 1948, the family moved to Memphis, Tennessee, allegedly because Vernon—in addition to needing work—had to escape the law for transporting bootleg liquor. In 1949, they lived at Lauderdale Courts, a public housing development in one of Memphis' poorer sections. Presley practiced playing guitar in the laundry room and also played in a five-piece band with other tenants. Another resident, Johnny Burnette, recalled, "Wherever Elvis went he'd have his guitar slung across his back... [H]e'd go in to one of the cafes or bars... Then some folks would say: 'Let's hear you sing, boy.'" Presley enrolled at L. C. Humes High School where some fellow students viewed his performing unfavorably; one recalled that he was "a sad, shy, not especially attractive boy" whose guitar playing was not likely to win any prizes. Presley was made fun of as a 'trashy' kind of boy, playing 'trashy' hillbilly music." Other children however, "would beg him" to sing, but he was apparently too shy to perform.

In September 1950, Presley occasionally worked evenings as an usher at Loew's State Theater—his first job—to boost the family income, but his mother made him quit as she feared it was affecting his school work. He worked again at Loew's in June the following year, but was fired after a fistfight over a female employee. He began to grow his sideburns and, when he could afford to, dress in the wild, flashy clothes of Lansky Brothers on Beale Street. He stood out, especially in the conservative Deep South of the 1950s, and was mocked and bullied for it. Childhood friend Red West said: "In the sea of 1600 pink-scalped kids at school, Elvis stood out like a camel in the arctic. ... [but] ... his appearance expressed a defiance which his demeanor did not match..." Despite any unpopularity or shyness, he was a contestant in his school's 1952 "Annual Minstrel Show" and won by receiving the most applause. His prize was to sing encores, including "Cold Cold Icy Fingers" and "Till I Waltz Again With You".

After graduation, Presley was still rather shy, a "kid who had spent scarcely a night away from home". His third job was driving a truck for the Crown Electric Company. He began wearing his hair longer with a "ducktail"—the style of truck drivers at that time.

Initial influences came through his family's attendance at the Assembly of God, a Pentecostal Holiness church. Rolling Stone wrote: "Gospel pervaded Elvis' character and was a defining and enduring influence all of his days." Throughout his life—in the recording studio, in private, or after concerts—Presley joined with others singing and playing gospel music at informal sessions.

The young Presley frequently listened to local radio; his first musical hero was family friend Mississippi Slim, a hillbilly singer with a radio show on Tupelos WELO. Presley performed occasionally on Slims Saturday morning show, Singin and Pickin Hillbilly. "He was crazy about music... Thats all he talked about," recalls his sixth grade friend, James Ausborn, Slims younger brother. Before he was a teenager, music was already Presleys "consuming passion". J. R. Snow, son of 1940s country superstar Hank Snow, recalls that even as a young man Presley knew all of Hank Snows songs, "even the most obscure". Presley himself said: "I loved records by Sister Rosetta Thorpe, ... Roy Acuff, Ernest Tubbs, Ted Daffan, Jimmie Rodgers, Jimmy Davis and Bob Wills."

In Memphis, Presley went to record stores that had jukeboxes and listening booths, playing old records and new releases for hours. He was an audience member at the all-night white—and black—"gospel sings" downtown. Memphis Symphony Orchestra concerts at Overton Park were another Presley favorite, along with the Metropolitan Opera. His small record collection included Mario Lanza and Dean Martin. Presley later said, "I just loved music. Music period."

Memphis had a strong tradition of blues music and Presley went to blues as well as hillbilly venues. Many of his future recordings were inspired by local African American composers and recording artists, including Arthur Crudup, Rufus Thomas and B.B. King. King says that he "knew Elvis before he was popular. He used to come around and be around us a lot ... on Beale Street."

Presley "was an untrained musician who played entirely by ear. 'I don't read music,' he confessed, 'but I know what I like.' ... Because he was not a songwriter, Presley [would] rarely [have] material prepared for recording sessions..." When later, as a young singer, he "ventured into the recording studio he was heavily influenced by the songs he had heard on the jukebox and radio."

On July 18, 1953, Presley went to Sun Records' Memphis Recording Service to record "My Happiness" with "That's When Your Heartaches Begin", supposedly a present for his mother. During his initial introduction at Sun Records, assistant Marion Keisker asked him who he sounded like. Presley replied: "I don't sound like nobody." On January 4, 1954, he cut a second acetate. At the time, Sun Records boss Sam Phillips was on the lookout for someone who could deliver a blend of black blues and boogie-woogie music; he thought it would be very popular among white people. When Phillips acquired a demo recording of "Without Love (There Is Nothing)" and was unable to identify the vocalist, Keisker reminded him about the young truck driver. She called him on June 26, 1954. Presley was not able to do justice to the song (though he would record it years later). Phillips would later recall that "Elvis was probably as nervous as anybody, black or white, that I had seen in front of a microphone." Despite this, Phillips invited local musicians Winfield "Scotty" Moore and Bill Black to audition Presley. Though they were not overly impressed, a studio session was planned.

During a recording break, Presley began "acting the fool" first with Arthur Crudup's "That's All Right (Mama)". Phillips quickly got them all to restart, and began taping. This was the sound he had been looking for. The group recorded other songs, including Bill Monroe's "Blue Moon of Kentucky". After the session, according to Scotty Moore, Bill Black remarked: "Damn. Get that on the radio and they'll run us out of town".

"That's All Right" was aired on July 8, 1954, by DJ Dewey Phillips. Listeners to the show began phoning in, eager to find out who the singer was. (The DJ mispronounced Presley's apparently unusual name as "Elton Preston.") The interest was such that Phillips played the demo fourteen times. During an interview on the show, Phillips asked Presley what high school he attended—to clarify Presley's color for listeners who assumed he must be black. The first release of Presley's music featured "That's All Right" and "Blue Moon of Kentucky". With Presley's version of Monroe's song consistently rated higher,both sides began to chart across the South.

Moore and Black began playing regularly with Presley. They gave performances on the July 17 and July 24, 1954 to promote the Sun single at the Bon Air, a rowdy music club in Memphis, where the band was not well-received. On July 30 the trio, billed as The Blue Moon Boys, made their first paid appearance at the Overton Park Shell, with Slim Whitman headlining. A nervous Presley's legs were said to have shaken uncontrollably during this show: his wide-legged pants emphasized his leg movements, apparently causing females in the audience to go "crazy". Scotty Moore claims it was just the natural way he moved and had nothing to do with "nerves." Presley consciously incorporated similar movements into future shows.

DJ and promoter Bob Neal became the trio's manager (replacing Scotty Moore). Moore and Black left their band, the Starlight Wranglers and, from August through October 1954, appeared with Presley at The Eagle's Nest. Presley debuted at the Grand Ole Opry in Nashville on October 2; Hank Snow introduced Presley on stage. He performed "Blue Moon of Kentucky" but received only a polite response. Afterwards, the singer was allegedly told by the Opry's Jim Denny: "Boy, youd better keep driving that truck.", though others deny it was Denny who made that statement.Country music promoter and manager Tillman Franks booked Presley for the Louisiana Hayride on October 16. Before Franks saw Presley, he referred to him as "that new black singer with the funny name". During Presley's first set, the reaction was muted; Franks then advised Presley to "Let it all go!" for the second set. House drummer D.J. Fontana (who had worked in strip clubs) complemented Presley's movements with accented beats. Bill Black also took an active part in encouraging the audience, and the crowd became more responsive.

According to one source, regarding Presley's engagements from that time, "Audiences had never before heard [such] music... [or] seen anyone who performed like Presley either. The shy, polite, mumbling boy gained self-confidence with every appearance... People watching the show were astounded and shocked, both by the ferocity of his performance, and the crowds reaction to it... Roy Orbison saw Presley for the first time in Odessa, Texas: 'His energy was incredible, his instinct was just amazing... I just didnt know what to make of it. There was just no reference point in the culture to compare it.'" Sam Phillips said Presley "put every ounce of emotion ... into every song, almost as if he was incapable of holding back."

By August 1955, Sun Studios had released ten sides credited to "Elvis Presley, Scotty and Bill", all typical of the developing Presley style. That style proved hard to categorize; he was billed or labeled in the media as "The King of Western Bop", "The Hillbilly Cat" and "The Memphis Flash".

On August 15, 1955, "Colonel" Tom Parker became Presley's manager, signing him to a one year contract, plus renewals. Several record labels had shown interest in signing Presley and, by the end of October 1955, three major labels had made offers up to $25,000. On November 21, 1955, Parker and Phillips negotiated a deal with RCA Victor Records to acquire Presley's Sun contract for an unprecedented $40,000, $5,000 of which was a bonus for the singer for back royalties owed to him by Sun Records (Presley, at 20, was officially still a minor, so his father had to sign the contract). By December 1955, RCA had begun to heavily promote its newest star, and by the month's end had re-released all of his Sun recordings.

On January 10, Presley made his first recordings for RCA in Nashville, Tennessee. The session produced "Heartbreak Hotel/I Was The One" which was released on January 27. The public reaction to "Heartbreak Hotel" prompted RCA to release it as a single in its own right (February 11). By April it had hit number one in the U.S. charts, selling in excess of one million copies. 

To increase the singer's exposure, Parker finally brought Presley to national television (In March 1955, Presley had failed an audition for Arthur Godfrey's Talent Scouts). He booked six Dorsey Brothers' Stage Show appearances in New York for CBS, beginning January 28, 1956. Presley was introduced on the first by Cleveland DJ Bill Randle. He stayed in town and on January 30, he and the band headed for the RCA's New York Studio. The sessions yielded eight songs, including "My Baby Left Me" and "Blue Suede Shoes". The latter was the only hit single from the collection, but the recordings marked the point at which Presley started moving away from the raw, pure Sun sound to the more commercial and mainstream sound RCA had envisioned for him.

On March 23, RCA Victor released Elvis Presley, his first album. Like the Sun recordings, the majority of the tracks were country songs. The album went on to top the pop album chart for 10 weeks.

On April 1, Presley launched his acting career with a screen-test for Paramount Pictures. His first motion-picture, Love Me Tender, was released on November 21 (See 'Acting career').

Colonel Parker had also obtained a deal for two lucrative shows with Milton Berle at NBC. Presley first appeared on The Milton Berle Show from the deck of the USS Hancock in San Diego on April 3. His performance was cheered by a live audience of appreciative sailors and their dates. A few days after, a flight taking Presley's band to Nashville for a recording session left all three badly shaken (the plane lost an engine and almost went down over Texas). After more hectic touring, Presley returned to The Milton Berle Show on June 5 and performed "Hound Dog" (without his guitar). Singing the song uptempo, he then began a slower version. His exaggerated, straight-legged shuffle around the microphone stand stirred the audience—as did his vigorous leg shaking and hip thrusts in time to the beat. Presley's "gyrations" created a storm of controversy—even eclipsing the 'communist threat' headlines prevalent at the time. The press described his performance as "vulgar" and "obscene". The furore was such that Presley was pressured to explain himself on the local New York City TV show Hy Gardner Calling: "Rock and roll music, if you like it, and you feel it, you can't help but move to it. That's what happens to me. I have to move around. I can't stand still. I've tried it, and I can't do it." After this performance he was dubbed "Elvis the Pelvis". Presley disliked the name, calling it "one of the most childish expressions I ever heard."

From April 23, Presley was scheduled to perform four weeks at the New Frontier Hotel and Casino on the Las Vegas Strip—billed this time as "the Atomic Powered Singer" (Since Nevada was the home of the U.S.'s atomic weapons testing, Parker thought the name would be catchy). His shows were so badly received by critics and the conservative, middle-aged guests, that Colonel Parker cut short the engagement from four weeks to two. . D.J. Fontana said, "I don't think the people there were ready for Elvis..... We tried everything we knew. Usually Elvis could get them on his side. It didn't work that time". While in Vegas, Presley saw Freddie Bell and the Bellboys live, and liked their version of Leiber and Stoller's "Hound Dog". By May 16, he had added the song to his own act.

The Berle shows drew such huge ratings that Steve Allen (NBC), not a fan of rock and roll, booked him for one appearance in New York on July 1. Allen wanted "to do a show the whole family can watch" and introduced a "new Elvis" in white bow tie and black tails. Presley sang "Hound Dog" for less than a minute to a Basset Hound in a top hat. According to one author, "Allen thought Presley was talentless and absurd... [he] set things up so that Presley would show his contrition..." In his book "Hi-Ho Steverino!" Allen wrote the following: "When I booked Elvis, I naturally had no interest in just presenting him vaudeville-style and letting him do his spot as he might in concert. Instead we worked him into the comedy fabric of our program. We certainly didn't inhibit Elvis' then-notorious pelvic gyrations, but I think the fact that he had on formal evening attire made him, purely on his own, slightly alter his presentation. The day after (July 2), the single "Hound Dog" was recorded and Scotty Moore said they were "all angry about their treatment the previous night". (Presley often referred to the Allen show as the most ridiculous performance of his career.) A few days later, Presley made a "triumphant" outdoor appearance in Memphis at which he announced: "You know, those people in New York are not gonna change me none. I'm gonna show you what the real Elvis is like tonight."

Country vocalists The Jordanaires accompanied Presley on The Steve Allen Show and their first recording session together produced "Any Way You Want Me", "Don't Be Cruel" and "Hound Dog". The Jordanaires would work with the singer through the 1960s.

Though Presley had been unhappy, Allen's show had, for the first time, beaten The Ed Sullivan Show in the ratings, causing a critical Sullivan (CBS) to book Presley for three appearances for an unprecedented $50,000.

Presley's first Ed Sullivan appearance (September 9, 1956) was seen by some 55–60 million viewers. Biographer Greil Marcus has written: "Compared to moments on the Dorsey shows and on the Berle show, it was ice cream." On the third Sullivan show, in spite of Presley's established reputation as a "gyrating" performer, he sang only slow paced ballads and a gospel song. Presley was nevertheless only shown to the television audience 'from the waist up', as if to censor the singer. Marcus claims he "stepped out in the outlandish costume of a pasha, if not a harem girl", and was shot in close up during this last broadcast, as if Sullivan had tried to 'bury' the singer, It was also claimed that Colonel Parker had himself orchestrated the 'censorship' merely to generate publicity. In spite of any misgivings about the controversial nature of his performing style (see 'Sex symbol'), Sullivan declared at the end of the third appearance that Presley was "a real decent, fine boy" and that they had never had "a pleasanter experience" on the show.

On December 4, Presley dropped into Sun Records where Carl Perkins and Jerry Lee Lewis were recording. Sam Phillips made sure the session of the three performing was recorded; the results would later appear on a bootlegged recording titled ''The Million Dollar Quartet'' in 1977 (Johnny Cash is often thought to have performed with the trio, but he was only present briefly at Phillips' instigation for a photo opportunity). RCA would eventually iron out legal difficulties and release an authorized version a few years later.

On December 29, Billboard revealed that Presley had placed more songs in the Top 100 than any other artist since chart records began. This news was followed by a front page report in the Wall Street Journal on December 31, that suggested Presley merchandise had grossed more than $22 million in sales.

When "That's All Right" was played, many listeners were sure Presley must be black, prompting white disc-jockeys to ignore his Sun singles. However, black disc-jockeys did not want anything to do with any record they knew was made by a white man. To many black adults, Presley had undoubtedly "stolen" or at least "derived his style from the Negro rhythm-and-blues performers of the late 1940s", , though such criticism ignored Presley's use of "white" musical styles. Some black entertainers, notably Jackie Wilson, argued: "A lot of people have accused Elvis of stealing the black mans music, when in fact, almost every black solo entertainer copied his stage mannerisms from Elvis."

By the spring of 1956, Presley was becoming popular nationwide and teenagers flocked to his concerts. Scotty Moore recalled: "Hed start out, 'You aint nothin but a Hound Dog,' and theyd just go to pieces. Theyd always react the same way. Thered be a riot every time." Bob Neal wrote: "It was almost frightening, the reaction... from [white] teenage boys. So many of them, through some sort of jealousy, would practically hate him." In Lubbock, Texas, a teenage gang fire-bombed Presley's car. Some performers became resentful (or resigned to the fact) that Presley's unmatched hustle onstage before them would "kill" their own act; he thus rose quickly to top billing. At the two concerts he performed at the 1956 Mississippi-Alabama Fair and Dairy Show, one hundred National Guardsmen were on hand to prevent crowd trouble.

To many white adults, the singer was "the first rock symbol of teenage rebellion. ... they did not like him, and condemned him as depraved. Anti-Negro prejudice doubtless figured in adult antagonism. Regardless of whether parents were aware of the Negro sexual origins of the phrase 'rock 'n' roll', Presley impressed them as the visual and aural embodiment of sex." In 1956, a critic for the New York Daily News wrote that popular music "has reached its lowest depths in the 'grunt and groin' antics of one Elvis Presley" and the Jesuits denounced him in its weekly magazine, America. Even Frank Sinatra opined: "His kind of music is deplorable, a rancid smelling aphrodisiac. It fosters almost totally negative and destructive reactions in young people." Presley responded to this (and other derogatory comments Sinatra made) by saying: "I admire the man. He has a right to say what he wants to say. He is a great success and a fine actor, but I think he shouldn't have said it... This ... [rock and roll] ... is a trend, just the same as he faced when he started years ago."

Presley was even seen as a "definite danger to the security of the United States." His actions and motions were called "a strip-tease with clothes on" or "sexual self-gratification on stage." They were compared with "masturbation or riding a microphone." Some saw the singer as a sexual pervert, and psychologists feared that teenaged girls and boys could easily be "aroused to sexual indulgence and perversion by certain types of motions and hysteria—the type that was exhibited at the Presley show." Presley would insist, however, that there was nothing vulgar about his stage act, saying: "Some people tap their feet, some people snap their fingers, and some people sway back and forth. I just sorta do em all together, I guess." In August 1956, a Florida judge called Presley a "savage" and threatened to arrest him if he shook his body while performing in Jacksonville. The judge declared that Presley's music was undermining the youth of America. Throughout the performance (which was filmed by police), he kept still as ordered, except for wiggling a finger in mockery at the ruling. (Presley recalls this incident during the '68 Comeback Special.)

In 1957, despite Presley's demonstrable respect for "black" music and performers, he faced accusations of racism. He was alleged to have said in Boston, Massachusetts: "The only thing Negro people can do for me is to buy my records and shine my shoes." Presley always denied saying, or ever wanting to say, such a racist remark. Jet magazine, run by and for African Americans, was subsequently keen to investigate the story. The singer's acquaintances in Memphis were pursued for any other racist anecdotes to back up the perception that Presley was racist, but none was found. Nor could any evidence be found of the date, location and persons involved when the remark was allegedly made (Presley had never visited Boston). However, the Jet journalist did find plenty of testimony that Presley judged people "regardless of race, color or creed". Even forty-five years later, the alleged remark was still being quoted as if it were a verified fact, to Presley's detriment.

His parents moved home in Memphis, but the singer lived there briefly. With increased concerns over privacy and security, Graceland was bought and renovated in 1957, a mansion with several acres of land. This was Presley's primary residence until his death.

Presley's record sales grew quickly throughout the late 1950s, with hits like "All Shook Up", "(Let me Be Your) Teddy Bear" and "Too Much".

On December 20, 1957, Presley received his draft notice. Hal Wallis and Paramount Pictures had already spent $350,000 on the film King Creole, and did not want to suspend or cancel the project. The Memphis Draft Board granted Presley a deferment to finish it. On March 24, 1958, he was inducted as US Army private #53310761 and completed basic training at Fort Hood, Texas on September 17, 1958, before being posted to Friedberg, Germany with the 3rd Armored Division, where his service took place from October 1, 1958 until March 2, 1960.

Fellow soldiers have attested to Presley's down-to-earth nature, and his generosity while in service. To supplement meager under-clothing supplies, Presley bought an extra set of fatigues for everyone in his outfit. He also donated his Army pay to charity, and purchased all the TV sets for personnel on the base at that time.

Presley had chosen not to join 'Special Services', which would have allowed him to avoid certain duties and maintain his public profile. He continued to receive massive media coverage, with much speculation echoing Presley's own concerns about his enforced absence damaging his career. However, early in 1958, RCA Victor producer Steve Sholes and Freddy Bienstock of Hill and Range (Presley's main music publishers) had both pushed for recording sessions and strong song material, the aim being to release regular hit recordings during Presley's two-year hiatus. Hit singles—and six albums—duly followed during that period.

As Presley's fame grew, his mother continued to drink excessively and began to gain weight. She had wanted her son to succeed, "but... [the] hysteria of the crowd frightened her." In early August 1958, doctors had diagnosed hepatitis and her condition worsened. Presley was granted emergency leave to visit her, arriving in Memphis on August 12. Two days later, Gladys Presley died of heart failure, aged forty-six. Presley was distraught, "grieving almost constantly" for days.

Some months later, in Germany, "[a] sergeant had introduced [Presley] to amphetamines when they were on maneuvers at Grafenwhr... it seemed like half the guys in the company were taking them." Friends around Presley, like Joe Esposito, also began taking them, "if only to keep up with Elvis, who was practically evangelical about their benefits." The Army also introduced Presley to karate—something which he studied seriously, even including it in his later live performances.

Presley returned to the U.S. on March 2, 1960, and was honorably discharged with the rank of sergeant on March 5. Any doubts Elvis had about his popularity must have been dispelled as "The train which carried him from New Jersey to Memphis was mobbed all the way, with Presley being called upon to appear ... at whistle-stops" to placate his fans. 

The first recording session, on March 20, 1960, was attended by all of the significant businessmen involved with Presley; none had heard him sing for two years, and there were inevitable concerns about him being able to recapture his previous success. The session was the first at which Presley was recorded using a three-track machine, allowing better quality, postsession remixing and stereophonic recording. This, and a further session in April, yielded some of Presley's best-selling songs. "It's Now or Never" ended with Presley "soaring up to an incredible top G sharp ... pure magic." His voice on "Are You Lonesome Tonight?" has been described as "natural, unforced, dead in tune, and totally distinctive." Although some tracks were uptempo, none could be described as "rock and roll", and many of them marked a significant change in musical direction. Most tracks found their way on to an album—Elvis is Back!—described by one critic as "a triumph on every level... It was as if Elvis had... broken down the barriers of genre and prejudice to express everything he heard in all the kinds of music he loved". The album was also notable because of Homer Boots Randolph's acclaimed saxophone playing on the blues songs "Like A Baby" and "Reconsider Baby", the latter being described as "a refutation of those who do not recognize what a phenomenal artist Presley was."

In 1956, Presley launched his career as a film actor. He screen-tested for Paramount Pictures by lip-synching "Blue Suede Shoes" and performing a scene as 'Bill Starbuck' in ''The Rainmaker''. Despite being quietly confident that The Rainmaker would be his first film—even going as far as saying so in an interview—the role eventually went to Burt Lancaster.

After signing a seven-year contract with Paramount, Presley made his big-screen dbut with the musical western, Love Me Tender. It was panned by the critics but did well at the box office.The original title—The Reno Brothers—was changed to capitalize on the advanced sales of the song "Love Me Tender". The majority of Presley's films were musical comedies made to "sell records and produce high revenues." He also appeared in more dramatic films, like Jailhouse Rock and King Creole. The erotic, if not homoerotic, dance sequence to the song "Jailhouse Rock", which Presley choreographed himself, "is considered by many as his greatest performance ever captured on film." To maintain box office success, he would later even shift "into beefcake formula comedy mode for a few years." He also made one non-musical western, Charro!.

Presley stopped live performing after his Army service with the exception, ironically—given Sinatra's previously scathing criticism—of a guest appearance on  (1960). He also performed three charity concerts—two in Memphis and one in Pearl Harbor (1961).

In the Army, Presley had said on many occasions that "more than anything, he wanted to be taken seriously as a dramatic actor." His manager, with an eye on long-term earnings, negotiated a multi-picture seven-year contract with Hal Wallis. The singer would later star alongside several established or up-coming actors, including Walter Matthau, Carolyn Jones, Angela Lansbury, Charles Bronson, Barbara Stanwyck, Mary Tyler Moore—and even a very young Kurt Russell in his screen debut. Although Presley was praised by directors, like Michael Curtiz, as polite and hardworking (and as having an exceptional memory), "he was definitely not the most talented actor around." Others were more charitable; critic Bosley Crowther of the New York Times said: "This boy can act," about his portrayal in King Creole. Director Joe Pasternak believed "Elvis should be given more meaty parts. ... He would be a good actor. He should do more important pictures."

The movies he did make, and the AIP beach movies (which were mainly made for an early sixties teenage audience), were generally criticized as a "pantheon of bad taste." The scripts of his movies "were all the same, the songs progressively worse." For Blue Hawaii, "fourteen songs were cut in just three days." Julie Parrish, who appeared in Paradise, Hawaiian Style, says that Presley hated many of the songs chosen for his films; he "couldn't stop laughing while he was recording" one of them. Others noted that the songs seemed to be "written on order by men who never really understood Elvis or rock and roll." However, several reputable songwriters/partnerships contributed soundtrack songs, including Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller, Don Robertson, Sid Tepper and Roy C. Bennett, and Otis Blackwell and Winfield Scott. Whatever the quality of the material, some observers have argued that Presley generally sang well in the studio, with commitment, and always played with distinguished musicians and backing singers. Sight and Sound wrote that in his movies "Elvis Presley, aggressively bisexual in appeal, knowingly erotic, [was] acting like a crucified houri and singing with a kind of machine-made surrealism." Critics would later claim that "No major star suffered through more bad movies than Elvis Presley."

Presley movies were nevertheless very popular, and he "became a film genre of his own." Hal Wallis would later remark: "An Elvis Presley picture is the only sure thing in Hollywood." Elvis on celluloid was the only chance for his world-wide fans to see him, in the absence of live appearances (the only time he toured outside of the U.S. was in Canada in 1957). His Blue Hawaii even "boosted the new state's tourism. Some of his most enduring and popular songs came from those [kind of] movies," like "Can't Help Falling in Love," "Return to Sender" and "Viva Las Vegas." His 1960s films and soundtracks grossed some $280 million. On December 1, 1968, the New York Times wrote: "Three times a year Elvis Presley ... [makes] multimillion-dollar feature-length films, with holiday titles like "Blue Hawaii", "Fun in Acapulco", "Viva Las Vegas", "Tickle Me", "Easy Come, Easy Go", "Live a Little, Love a Little" and the latest in the series, "Chataqua" [released as Charro!]. For each film Elvis receives a million dollars in wages and 50 per cent of the profits. ... [E]very film yields an LP sound-track record which may sell as many as two-million copies."

In 1964, Richard Burton and Peter O'Toole had starred in Hal Wallis' acclaimed Becket. Wallis admitted to the press that the financing of such quality productions was only possible by making a series of profitable B-movies starring Presley. He branded Wallis "a double-dealing sonofabitch" (and he thought little better of Tom Parker), realizing there had never been any intention to let him develop into a serious actor.

Presley was similarly exploited the following year with the film Tickle Me. Allied Artists had serious financial problems and hoped a Presley film would help them "stay afloat". By agreeing to a lower fee, using previously recorded songs and filming on the studio back-lot, Allied Artists were able to keep costs very low. Considered one of the weakest of all Presley pictures, it became the third highest grossing picture in Allied Artists' history, and saved them from bankruptcy at the time.

Presley was one of the highest paid actors during the 1960s, but times were changing. "[The] Elvis Presley film was becoming pass. Young people were tuning in, dropping out and doing acid. Musical acts like Jefferson Airplane, Grateful Dead, The Doors, Janis Joplin and many others were dominating the airwaves. Elvis Presley was not considered cool as he once was." Priscilla Presley recalls: "He blamed his fading popularity on his humdrum movies" and "... loathed their stock plots and short shooting schedules." She also notes: "He could have demanded better, more substantial scripts, but he didn't."

Change of Habit (1969) was the singer's final movie role. His last two films were concert documentaries in the early 1970s, though Presley was keen to consider dramatic movie roles. (See: 'Influence of Colonel Parker and others').

As well as the formulaic movie songs of the 1960s, Presley added to the studio recordings of Elvis Is Back, by recording other noteworthy songs like "She's Not You", "Suspicion," "Little Sister", "(You're the) Devil in Disguise" and "It Hurts Me." In 1966 he recorded a cover of Bob Dylan's "Tomorrow is a Long Time" (which RCA Victor relegated to a bonus track on the soundtrack album for Spinout). He also produced two gospel albums: His Hand in Mine (1960) and How Great Thou Art (1966). In 1967, he recorded some well-received singles, like Guitar Man, by songwriter/guitar player Jerry Reed. However, "during the Beatles era (1963-70), only six Elvis singles reached number ten or better. 'Suspicious Minds' was the lone number one."

During filming of Paradise, Hawaiian Style, Presley returned to his Bel Air home. The Beatles were at the end of their second U.S. tour. Colonel Parker had been negotiating a meeting for some time, through The Beatles' manager Brian Epstein, though Parker simply saw it as a valuable publicity opportunity (He had apparently even tried to get the group and Presley to perform the closing song in the same movie, but The Beatles' film contract precluded it). The group arrived in Bel Air amid a flurry of elaborate security arrangements made by Parker at 10pm, on August 27, 1965. The visit lasted about four hours. Many of Presley's closest and trusted friends— members of the so-called "Memphis Mafia"—were present, including school friend and bodyguard Red West, Marty Lacker, Jerry Schilling, Larry Geller and their girlfriends, etc..

Biographer Peter Guralnick maintains that Presley was at best "lukewarm" about playing host to people he did not really know, and it took a while for everyone to feel comfortable. Paul McCartney later said: "It was one of the great meetings of my life. I think he liked us. I think at that time, he may have felt a little bit threatened, but he didn't say anything. We certainly didn't feel any antagonism. I only met him that once, and then I think the success of our career started to push him out a little, which we were very sad about, because we wanted to coexist with him."

Marty Lacker recalls Presley saying: "'Quite frankly, if you guys are going to stare at me all night, I'm going to bed. I thought we'd talk a while and maybe jam a little.' And when he said that, they [The Beatles] went nuts." The group told stories, joked and listened to records. The five of them had an impromptu jam session. "They all went to the piano," says Lacker, "and Elvis handed out a couple of guitars. And they started singing Elvis songs, Beatle songs, Chuck Berry songs. Elvis played Paul's bass part on "I Feel Fine", and Paul said something like, 'You're coming along quite promising on the bass there, Elvis.' I remember thinking later, 'Man, if we'd only had a tape recorder.'"

Ringo Starr played pool with two others that night; George Harrison "looked to most of the guys to be stoned" on arrival and allegedly smoked a joint with Larry Geller and talked about Hinduism (see: 'Influence of Colonel Parker and others'). Parker played roulette with Epstein. However, Guralnick claims The Beatles were, overall, disappointed by the visit. They still reciprocated with an invitation for Elvis to visit them, but only some of Presley's "Memphis Mafia" accepted. "John Lennon went out of his way to tell Jerry [Schilling] how much the evening had meant to him" and asked Schilling to tell Presley, "'[I]f it hadn't been for him I would have been nothing.'" Schilling says that when he told Presley he did not say anything, but "just kind of smiled."(See: '19701972)').

Presley's sexual appeal and photogenic looks have been acknowledged. Director Steve Binder, not a fan of Presley's music at the time, recalled from the '68 Comeback Special: "I'm straight as an arrow and I got to tell you, you stop, whether you're male or female, to look at him. He was that good looking. And if you never knew he was a superstar, it wouldn't make any difference; if he'd walked in the room, you'd know somebody special was in your presence."

According to Marjorie Garber, a "male rock critic writing in 1970 praised Elvis as 'The master of the sexual simile, treating his guitar as both phallus and girl.' ... rumor had it that into his skin-tight jeans was sewn a lead bar to suggest a weapon of heroic proportions." She cites a boyhood friend of Presley's who claims the singer actually used a cardboard toilet roll tube to make it "look to the girls up front like he had one helluva thing there inside his pants."  Ed Sullivan had apparently heard similar rumors and instructed his director Marlo Lewis to film only Presley's chest and head for his final Sullivan appearance. However, Lewis was skeptical about Presley wearing such a device and says simply: "It wasn't there".

Accounts of Presley's numerous sexual conquests may be exaggerated. Cybill Shepherd reveals that Presley kissed her all over her naked body - but refused to have oral sex with her. Ex-Girlfriends Judy Spreckels and June Juanico had no sexual relationships with Presley. Byron Raphael and Alanna Nash have stated that the star "would never put himself inside one of these girls..." Cassandra Peterson ("Elvira") says she knew Presley for only one night, but all they did was talk. Cher regrets turning him down when he asked her to stay with him in Las Vegas, because she was too nervous of spending the night with him.  Peggy Lipton claims that he was "virtually impotent" with her, but she attributed this to his boyishness and drug misuse. Guralnick concurs with others, "he wasn't really interested", preferring to lie in bed, watch television and talk.

Ann-Margret (Presley's co-star in Viva Las Vegas) refers to Presley as her "soulmate" but has revealed little else. A publicity campaign about Presley and Margret's romance was launched during the filming of Viva Las Vegas, which helped to increase Margret's popularity. Presley apparently dated many female co-stars for publicity purposes. Lori Williams dated him for a while in 1964. She says their "courtship was not some bizarre story. It was very sweet and Elvis was the perfect gentleman."

Former partner Linda Thompson says they did not consummate their relationship until after a few months of dating. After they broke up in December 1976, many say Presley never had sex again. His last girlfriend, Ginger Alden claims to be engaged to Presley at the time of his death, though her story is contradicted by many of Presley's close friends.



Elvis and Priscilla met in 1959 at a party in Bad Nauheim, Germany during his stay in the army. She was 14 at the time they met, while he was 24. They quickly began a serious relationship and frequently visited each other until he left Germany in 1960.

Priscilla and Elvis stayed in contact over the phone, though they would not see each other again until the summer of 1962, when Priscilla's parents agreed to let her visit for two weeks. After another visit at Christmas, Priscilla's parents finally let her move to America for good. Part of the agreement was that she would be privately educated, to complete her senior year, and live with Elvis' father and his wife, Dee, in their home—due to Presley's difficulty with accepting his stepmother, he arranged for them to live in a separate house on the Graceland estate. However, it wasn't long until Priscilla was moved into Graceland to live with Elvis. 

In her autobiography, Elvis and Me, Priscilla says that Elvis refused to have sex with her until they were married. However, biographer Suzanne Finstad writes that Priscilla and Elvis slept together on their second date. 

Shortly before Christmas 1966, Presley proposed to Priscilla. They married on May 1, 1967 at the Aladdin Hotel in Las Vegas. In typical fashion, Colonel Parker had arranged a photo session and press conference to be conducted shortly after the ceremony. According to Finstad, this marriage was part of a mastermind for fame hatched by Priscilla and her mother.

Their only child, Lisa Marie, was born on February 1, 1968.

By 1967, Colonel Tom Parker had negotiated a contract that gave him 50% of Presley's earnings. Parker's excessive gambling—and his subsequent need to have Presley signed up to commercially lucrative contracts—may well have adversely affected the course of Presley's career. Parker's concerns about his own U.S. citizenship may have also been a factor in Parker and the singer never exploiting Presley's popularity abroad (see: '19731976'). It has been claimed that Presley's original band was fired in order to isolate the singer: Parker wanted no one close to Presley to suggest that a better management deal might exist.

As well as signing Presley to RCA Victor, Parker also cut a deal with Hill and Range Publishing Company to create a separate entity— "Elvis Presley Music Incorporated"—to handle all of Presley's songs and accrued royalties. Parker would later use this set-up to make songwriters relinquish some of their royalties; this ultimately resulted in the better writers refusing to provide songs for Presley, causing a marked decline in the quality of his output over the years.Presley apparently disliked several songs—even some of the earliest top sellers he became famous for (which suggests commercial influences were sometimes greater than his own desires). Presley's friend Jerry Schilling relates that one way to really annoy the singer was to play a song, like "All Shook Up", on a jukebox at one of his private parties. "Get that crap off," was his typical reaction.

In 1969, record producer Chips Moman and Presley recorded with Moman's own musicians at his American Sound Studios in Memphis. Given the control exerted by RCA and the music publishers, this was a significant departure. Moman still had to deal with Hill and Range staff on site and was not happy with their song choices. Moman could only get the best out of the singer when he threatened to quit the sessions and asked Presley to remove the "aggravating" publishing personnel from the studio. RCA Victor executive Joan Deary was later full of praise for the song choices and superior results of Moman's work, like "In the Ghetto" and "Suspicious Minds", but despite this, no producer was to override Hill and Range's control again.

According to life-long friend and "Memphis Mafia" member George Klein, over the years Presley was offered lead roles in the film Midnight Cowboy and in West Side Story. Robert Mitchum personally offered him the lead in Thunder Road. In 1974, Barbra Streisand approached Presley to star with her in the remake of A Star is Born. In each case, any ambitions the singer may have had to play such parts were thwarted by his manager's negotiating demands, or his flat refusals.

Marty Lacker regarded Parker as a "hustler and scam artist" who abused Presley's trust, but Lacker acknowledged that Parker was a master promoter. Priscilla Presley noted that "Elvis detested the business side of his career. He would sign a contract without even reading it."

Presley's father in turn distrusted Lacker and the other members of the "Memphis Mafia"; he thought they collectively exercised an unhealthy influence over his son. "[I]t was no wonder" that as the singer "slid into addiction and torpor, no one raised the alarm: to them, Elvis was the bank, and it had to remain open." Musician Tony Brown noted the urgent need to reverse Presley's declining health as the singer toured in the mid-1970s. "But we all knew it was hopeless because Elvis was surrounded by that little circle of people... all those so-called friends and... bodyguards."

Larry Geller became Presley's hairdresser in 1964. Unlike others in the "Memphis Mafia", Geller was interested in 'spiritual studies', and was subsequently viewed with suspicion and scorn by the singer's manager and friends. From their first conversation, Geller recalls how Presley revealed his secret thoughts and anxieties, how "there's got to be a reason... why I was chosen to be Elvis Presley.'" He then poured out his heart in "an almost painful rush of words and emotions," telling Geller about his mother and the hollowness of his Hollywood life, things he could not share with anyone around him. Thereafter, Presley voraciously read books Geller supplied, on religion and mysticism. Perhaps most tellingly, he revealed to Geller: "I swear to God, no one knows how lonely I get and how empty I really feel." Presley would be preoccupied by such matters for much of his life, taking trunkloads of books with him on tour.

Presley showed interest in many beliefs, including Mormonism. A Book of Mormon owned by Presley (containing notes allegedly written by the singer) was given to Alan Osmond after his death, and is now said to be in the church's archives in Salt Lake City (A second copy may have been given to Presley by Mormon Ed Parker, a karate instructor). However, Linda Thompson, Presley's girlfriend after his separation, notes: "[H]e really followed the bible and he also was on a spiritual quest to find out how other people of other faiths lived their lives... he used to wear an Egyptian ankh, a star of David and a crucifix around his neck. And when people would say are you confused, he would say, no, not at all. I just don't want to miss heaven on a technicality."

In 1968, even Presley's version of Jerry Reed's hook-laden "Guitar Man" had failed to enter the U.S. Top 40. He continued to issue movie soundtrack albums that sold poorly compared to those of films like Blue Hawaii from 1961. It had also been nearly six years since the single "Good Luck Charm" had topped the Billboard Hot 100.

Presley was, by now, "profoundly" unhappy with his career. Colonel Parker's plans once again included television, and he arranged for Presley to appear in his own special. The singer had not been on television since Frank Sinatra's Timex special in May of 1960.. Parker shrewdly manoeuvred a deal with NBC's Tom Sarnoff which included the network's commitment to financing a future Presley feature film—something that Parker had found increasingly difficult to secure.

The special was made in June, but was first aired on December 3, 1968 as a Christmas telecast called simply Elvis. Later dubbed the '68 Comeback Special by fans and critics, the show featured some lavishly staged studio productions. Other songs however, were performed live with a band in front of small audience—Presley's first live appearance as a performer since 1961. The live segments saw Presley clad in black leather, singing and playing guitar in an uninhibited style—reminiscent of his rock and roll days. Rolling Stone called it "a performance of emotional grandeur and historical resonance." Jon Landau in Eye magazine remarked: "There is something magical about watching a man who has lost himself find his way back home. He sang with the kind of power people no longer expect of rock 'n' roll singers. He moved his body with a lack of pretension and effort that must have made Jim Morrison green with envy." Its success was helped by director and co-producer, Steve Binder, who worked hard to reassure the nervous singer and to produce a show that was not just an hour of Christmas songs, as Colonel Parker had originally planned.

By January, 1969, one of the key songs written specifically for the special, "If I Can Dream", reached number 12.. The soundtrack of the special also broke into the Top 10. On December 4, when the TV ratings were released, NBC reported that Presley had captured 42 percent of the total viewing audience. It was the network's number one rated show that season.

Jerry Schilling recalls: "The '68 special inspired Elvis; reminding him what he had not been able to do for years, being able to choose the people; being able to choose what songs and not being told what had to be on the soundtrack. What he had to wear. He was out of prison, man." Steve Binder said of Presley's reaction: "I played Elvis the 60-minute show, and he told me in the screening room, "Steve, it's the greatest thing I've ever done in my life. I give you my word I will never sing a song I don't believe in."

Buoyed by the experience, Presley engaged in the prolific series of recording sessions at American Sound Studios, which lead to the acclaimed From Elvis in Memphis (Chips Moman was its uncredited producer). It was followed by From Memphis To Vegas/From Vegas To Memphis, a double-album. The same sessions lead to the hit singles "In the Ghetto", "Suspicious Minds", "Kentucky Rain" and "Don't Cry Daddy".

In 1969, Presley was keen to resume regular live performing. Following the success of Elvis, many new offers came in from around the world. The London Palladium wanted an "Elvis Spectacular" and offered Parker $28,000 for a one week engagement. He responded: "That's fine for me, now how much can you get for Elvis?". By May, the brand new International Hotel in Las Vegas announced that it had booked Presley; he was scheduled to perform from July 31, after Barbra Streisand opened the new venue.

Presley duly delivered fifty-seven shows over four weeks at the hotel, which had the largest showroom in the city. He had assembled some of the finest musicians—including an orchestra—and some of the best soul/gospel back-up singers available..

Despite such a prestigious backing, Presley was nervous; he had last appeared in Las Vegas at the New Frontier Hotel in 1956 and it was considered a disaster. Parker subsequently promoted Elvis' appearances all over Las Vegas; he rented every available billboard and took out full-page advertisements in local and trade papers. The lobby of the International prominently displayed Presley souvenirs; records, T-shirts, straw boaters and stuffed animals. Parker wanted to make sure that Presley's return to the stage would be the show business event of the year, and hotel owner Kirk Kerkorian planned to send his own plane to New York to fly in the rock press for the debut performance.

Presley took to the stage with no introduction. The audience—which included Pat Boone, Fats Domino, Wayne Newton, Dick Clark, Ann-Margret, George Hamilton, Angie Dickinson, and Henry Mancini—gave him a standing ovation before he sang one note. After a successful performance, he returned to give an encore, of "Can't Help Falling in Love", and received his third standing ovation. Backstage, many celebrities and well-wishers, including Cary Grant, congratulated Presley on his triumphant return which, in the showroom alone, had generated over $1,500,000 in revenues.

Newsweek commented: "There are several unbelievable things about Elvis, but the most incredible is his staying power in a world where meteoric careers fade like shooting stars." Rolling Stone magazine declared Presley to be "supernatural, his own resurrection", while Variety proclaimed him a "superstar". At a press conference after his opening show, when a reporter referred to him as "The King", Presley pointed to Fats Domino, standing at the back of the room. "No," he said, "thats the real king of rock and roll."

The next day, Parker's negotiations with the hotel resulted in a five-year contract for Presley to play each February and August, at a salary of $1 million per year.



In January 1970, Presley returned to the International Hotel for a month-long engagement, performing two shows a night. RCA recorded some shows and the best material appeared on the album . In late February, Presley performed six more attendance-breaking shows at the Houston Astrodome in Texas.In August at the International Hotel, MGM filmed rehearsal and concert footage for a documentary: . He wore a jumpsuit—a garment that would become a trademark of Presley's live performances in the 1970s. Although he had new hit singles in many countries, some were critical of his song choices and accused him of being distant from trends within contemporary music.

Around this time Presley was threatened with kidnapping at the International Hotel. Phone calls were received, one demanding $50,000; if unpaid, Presley would be killed by a "crazy man". The FBI took the threat seriously and security was stepped up for the next two shows. Presley went on stage with a Derringer in his right boot and a .45 in his waistband, but nothing untoward transpired. (The singer had had many threats of varying degrees since the fifties, many of them made without the singer's knowledge).

After closing his Las Vegas engagement on September 7, Presley embarked on his first concert tour since 1958. Feeling exhausted, Presley spent a month relaxing and recording before touring again in October and November. He would tour extensively in the U.S. up to his death; many of the 1,145 concerts setting attendance records.

On December 21, 1970, Presley met with President Richard Nixon at the White House (Presley arrived with a gift—a handgun. It was accepted but not presented for security reasons). Presley had engineered the encounter to express his patriotism, his contempt for the hippie drug culture and his wish to be appointed a "Federal Agent at Large". He also wished to obtain a Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs badge to add to similar items he had begun collecting. He offered to "infiltrate hippie groups" and claimed that The Beatles had "made their money, then gone back to England where they fomented anti-American feeling." Nixon was uncertain and bemused by their encounter, and twice expressed concern that Presley needed to "retain his credibility". Ringo Starr later said he found it very sad to think Presley held such views. "This is Mr. Hips, the man, and he felt we were a danger. I think that the danger was mainly to him and his career." Paul McCartney said also that he "felt a bit betrayed ... The great joke was that we were taking drugs, and look what happened to [Elvis]. ... It was sad, but I still love him. ..."

On January 16, 1971 Presley was named 'One of the Ten Outstanding Young Men of the Nation' by the U.S. Junior Chamber of Commerce (The Jaycees). That summer, the City of Memphis named part of Highway 51 South "Elvis Presley Boulevard", and he won the Lifetime Achievement Award from the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences (the organization that presents Grammy awards).

In April 1972, MGM again filmed Presley, this time for Elvis on Tour, which won a 1972 Golden Globe for Best Documentary. A fourteen-date tour started with an unprecedented four consecutive sold-out shows at Madison Square Garden, New York. RCA taped the shows for a live album. After the tour, Presley released the 1972 single "Burning Love"—his last top ten hit in the U.S. charts.

Off stage, Presley had continuing problems. His lifelong friend, Joe Esposito, said Elvis "could never be true to any one woman." It was widely known that Presley had several affairs during his 13-year union with Priscilla, notably with Ann-Margret. In spite of his own infidelity, Presley was furious that Priscilla was having an affair with a mutual acquaintance—Mike Stone, a karate instructor she had met in 1971 backstage at one of Presley's concerts. It was Presley himself who first suggested Priscilla should take lessons from Stone. Once the news of their affair came to his attention, he raged obsessively: "There's too much pain in me... Stone [must] die." A bodyguard, Red West, felt compelled to get a price for a contract killing and was relieved when Presley decided: "Aw hell... Maybe it's a bit heavy..." The Presleys separated on February 23, 1972 and divorced on October 9, 1973, agreeing to share custody of their daughter.

Following his separation from Priscilla, he lived with Linda Thompson, a songwriter and one-time Memphis beauty queen, from July 1972 until just a few months before his death.

In January 1973, Presley performed two charity concerts in Hawaii for the Kui Lee cancer foundation. The first (January 12) was primarily a practice run for the main show which was broadcast live on January 14 (The first show also served as a backup if technical problems affected the live broadcast). The "Aloha from Hawaii" concert was the world's first live concert satellite broadcast, reaching at least a billion viewers live and a further 500 million on delay. The show's album went to number one and spent a year in the charts. The album also proved to be Presley's last U.S. Number One album during his lifetime.

After his divorce in 1973, Presley became increasingly isolated and overweight, with prescription drugs affecting his health, mood and his stage act. He overdosed twice on barbiturates, spending three days in a coma in his hotel suite after the first. According to Dr. George C. Nichopoulos, Presley's physician, the singer was "near death" in November of 1973 because of side effects of Demerol addiction. Nichopoulos notes that the hospital admission "was crazy", because of the enormous attention Presley attracted, and the measures necessary to protect his medical details. Lab technicians were even exploiting Presley's ill-health by selling samples of his blood and urine.

In his book, Elvis: The Final Years, Jerry Hopkins writes: "Elvis' health plummeted as his weight ballooned." At a University of Maryland concert on September 27 (1974), band members "had trouble recognizing him. ... 'He walked on stage and held onto the mike for the first thirty minutes like it was a post. Everybody was scared.' Guitarist John Wilkinson ... recalled, ... 'He was all gut. He was slurring. ... It was obvious he was drugged, that there was something terribly wrong with his body. It was so bad, the words to the songs were barely intelligible. ... We were in a state of shock.' "

Despite this, his "thundering" live version of "How Great Thou Art" won him a Grammy award in 1974. Presley won three competitive "Grammies" for his gospel recordings: "How Great Thou Art"—the album, as well as the single—and for the album He Touched Me (1972). (He had fourteen nominations during his career, though it has been claimed that "Elvis has never been adequately appreciated by those who give the Grammies.")

In April 1974, rumours began that he would actually be playing overseas after years of offers. A $1,000,000 bid came in from a source in Australia for him to tour there, but Colonel Parker was uncharacteristically reluctant to accept such large sums. This prompted those closest to Presley to speculate about Parker's past and circumstances, and the reasons for his apparent unwillingness to apply for a passport to travel abroad. He scotched any notions Presley had of overseas work by citing poor security in other countries, and the lack of suitable venues for a star of his status. Presley apparently accepted such excuses, at the time.

Presley continued to play to sell-out crowds in the U.S.; a 1975 tour ended with a concert in Pontiac, Michigan, attended by over 62,000 fans. However the singer now had "no motivation to lose his extra poundage... he became self-conscious... his self-confidence before the audience declined... Headlines such as 'Elvis Battles Middle Age' and 'Time Makes Listless Machine of Elvis' were not uncommon." According to Marjorie Garber, when Presley made his later appearances in Las Vegas, he appeared "heavier, in pancake make-up... with an elaborate jewelled belt and cape, crooning pop songs to a microphone ... [He] had become Liberace. Even his fans were now middle-aged matrons and blue-haired grandmothers, ... Mother's Day became a special holiday for Elvis' fans."

On July 13, 1976, Presley's father fired "Memphis Mafia" bodyguards Red West, Sonny West and David Hebler. All three were taken by surprise, especially the Wests, who had been with Presley since the beginning of his career. Presley was away in Palm Springs when it happened, and some suggest the singer was too cowardly to face them himself. Vernon Presley cited the need to "cut back on expenses" when dismissing the three, but David Stanley has claimed that the real reason was that the bodyguards were becoming more outspoken over Presley's drug dependency. A "trusted associate" of Presley, John O'Grady, also stated, in agreement with Parker and Vernon Presley, that the bodyguards "were too rough with the fans... resulting in a lot of unnecessary lawsuits" and lawyers' fees. The Wests and Hebler would later write a devastating indictment of Presley in the book: Elvis: What Happened?, published August 1, 1977. (See: 'Final year and death').

Almost throughout the 1970s, RCA Victor had been increasingly concerned about making money from Presley material: they often had to rely on live recordings because of problems getting him to attend studio sessions. RCA Victor's mobile studio was occasionally sent to Graceland in the hope of capturing an inspired vocal performance. Once in a studio, he could lack interest or be easily distracted; often this was linked to his health and drug problems.

In 2006, a journalist recalled: "Elvis Presley had [in 1977] become a grotesque caricature of his sleek, energetic former self... he was barely able to pull himself through his abbreviated concerts." In Alexandria, Louisiana, the singer was on stage for less than an hour and "was impossible to understand." In Baton Rouge, Presley failed to appear: he was unable to get out of his hotel bed, and the rest of the tour was cancelled.In Knoxville, Tennessee on May 20, "there was no longer any pretense of keeping up appearances. The idea was simply to get Elvis out on stage and keep him upright..." Despite his obvious problems, shows in Omaha, Nebraska and Rapid City, South Dakota were recorded for an album and a CBS-TV special: Elvis In Concert.

In Rapid City, "he was so nervous on stage that he could hardly talk... He was undoubtedly painfully aware of how he looked, and he knew that in his condition, he could not perform any significant movement." His performance in Omaha "exceeded everyone's worst fears... [giving] the impression of a man crying out for help..." According to Guralnick, fans "were becoming increasingly voluble about their disappointment, but it all seemed to go right past Elvis, whose world was now confined almost entirely to his room and his [spiritualism] books." A cousin, Billy Smith, recalled how Presley would sit in his room and chat, recounting things like his favorite Monty Python sketches and his own past japes, but "mostly there was a grim obsessiveness... a paranoia about people, germs... future events", that reminded Smith of Howard Hughes.



The book Elvis: What Happened? was published just fifteen days before Presley's death. It was the first expos to detail Presley's years of drug misuse, and was apparently the authors' revenge for them being sacked and also a plea to get Presley to recognize the extent of his drug problems. The singer "was devastated by the book. Here were his close friends who had written serious stuff that would affect his life. He felt betrayed."

Presley's final performance was in Indianapolis at the Market Square Arena, on June 26, 1977. According to many of his entourage who accompanied him on tour, it was the "best show he had given in a long time" with "some strong singing".

Another tour was scheduled to begin August 17, 1977, but at Graceland the day before, Presley was found on his bathroom floor by fiance, Ginger Alden. According to the medical investigator, Presley had "stumbled or crawled several feet before he died"; he had apparently been using the toilet at the time. Death was officially pronounced at 3:30 pm at the Baptist Memorial Hospital.

Before his funeral, hundreds of thousands of fans, the press and celebrities lined the streets and many hoped to see the open casket in Graceland. One of Presley's cousins, Bobby Mann, accepted $18,000 to secretly photograph the corpse; the picture duly appeared on the cover of the National Enquirer, making it the largest and fastest selling issue of all time. Two days after the singer's death, a car ploughed into a group of 2000 fans outside Presley's home, killing two women and critically injuring a third. Among the mourners at the funeral were Ann-Margret (who had remained close to Presley) and his ex-wife. U.S. President Jimmy Carter issued a statement (See 'Legacy').

On Thursday, August 18, following a funeral service at Graceland, Elvis Presley was buried at Forest Hill Cemetery in Memphis, next to his mother. After an attempt to steal the body on August 28, and with no sign of security concerns at Forest Hills abating, his—and his mother's—remains were reburied at Graceland in the Meditation Garden in October.

Presley had developed many health problems during his life, some of them chronic. He started taking drugs (amphetamines) regularly in the army; it has also been claimed that pills of some form were first given to him by Memphis DJ Dewey Phillips. Priscilla Presley writes that by 1962, he was taking placidyls to combat severe insomnia in ever-increasing doses and later took Dexedrine to counter the sleeping pills' after-effects. She later saw "problems in Elvis' life, all magnified by taking prescribed drugs." Presley's physician, Dr. Nichopoulos, has said: "[Elvis] felt that by getting [pills] from a doctor, he wasn't the common everyday junkie getting something off the street. He... thought that as far as medications and drugs went, there was something for everything."

According to Guralnick: "[D]rug use was heavily implicated... no one ruled out the possibility of anaphylactic shock brought on by the codeine pills... to which he was known to have had a mild allergy." In two lab reports filed two months later, each indicated "a strong belief that the primary cause of death was polypharmacy," with one report "indicating the detection of fourteen drugs in Elvis' system, ten in significant quantity." It appears he died of Combined Drug Intoxication.

The medical profession has been seriously questioned. Medical Examiner Dr. Jerry Francisco had publicly offered a cause of death while the autopsy was still being performed, but before toxicology results were known. Dr. Francisco dubiously stated that cardiac arrhythmia was the cause of death, a condition that can only be determined in a living person—not post mortem. Many doctors had been flattered to be associated with Presley (or had been bribed with gifts) and supplied him with pills, which simply fed his addictions. The singer allegedly spent at least $1 million annually during his latter years on drugs and doctors' fees or inducements. Although Dr. Nichopoulos was exonerated with regard to Presley's death, "In the first eight months of 1977 alone, he had [prescribed] more than 10,000 doses of sedatives, amphetamines, and narcotics: all in Elvis' name. On January 20, 1980, the board found [against] him... but decided that he was not unethical [because he claimed he'd been trying to wean the singer off the drugs]." His license was suspended. In July 1995, it was permanently revoked after it was found he had improperly dispensed drugs to several patients including Jerry Lee Lewis.

In 1994, the autopsy into Presley's death was re-opened. Coroner Dr. Joseph Davis declared: "There is nothing in any of the data that supports a death from drugs [i.e. drug overdose]. In fact, everything points to a sudden, violent heart attack." However, there is little doubt that long-term drug abuse caused his premature death.



Author Samuel Roy has argued: "Elvis' death did occur at a time when it could only help his reputation. Just before his death, Elvis had been forgotten by society."

Biographer Ernst Jorgensen has observed that when Presley died, it was as if all perspective on his musical career had been lost. His latter-day song choices had been seen as poor; many who disliked Presley had long been dismissive because he did not write his own songs. Others complained—incorrectly—that he could not play musical instruments. Such criticism of Presley continues. The tabloids had ridiculed his obesity and his kitschy, jump-suited performances. Comedian George Carlin remarked, "America got what it deserved in Elvis Presley: a big fat, drug-addicted squealer." Sade Adu said about Presley: "when I see him in his fifties movies, Jailhouse Rock and King Creole, that's an image I desire to look like. But when he's in his jumpsuit I just think of him as a drag queen." His sixties' film career was mocked. (In 1980, John Lennon said: "[Presley] died when he went into the army. That's when they killed him, that's when they castrated him.") Acknowledgment of his vocal style had been reduced to mocking the hiccuping, vocalese tricks that he had used on some early recordings—and to the way he said "Thankyouverymuch" after songs during live shows. This was only countered by the uncritical adulation of die-hard fans, who had even denied that he looked "fat" before he died. Any wish to understand Elvis Presley—his genuine abilities and his real influence—"seemed almost totally obscured."

Presley has featured prominently in a variety of polls and surveys designed to measure popularity and influence. However, sociologist Philip Ennis writes: "Perhaps it is an error of enthusiasm to freight Elvis Presley with too heavy a historical load" because, according to a opinion poll of high school students in 1957, Pat Boone was nearly the "two-to-one favorite over Elvis Presley among boys and preferred almost three-to-one by girls..." However, Presley's early music and live performances are credited with helping to lay a commercial foundation which allowed established African American acts of the 1950s to receive due recognition. Performers like Fats Domino, Chuck Berry and Little Richard, came to national prominence after Presley's mix of musical styles was accepted among White American teenagers. Rather than Presley being seen as a white man who 'stole black music', Little Richard argued: "He was an integrator, Elvis was a blessing. They wouldn't let black music through. He opened the door for black music." Al Green agreed, saying; "He broke the ice for all of us." It has also been claimed that Presley's sound and persona helped to relax the rigid color line and thereby fed the fires of the civil rights movement.

In the late 1960s, composer and conductor Leonard Bernstein remarked: "Elvis is the greatest cultural force in the twentieth century. He introduced the beat to everything, music, language, clothes, it's a whole new social revolution... the 60's comes from it."

Other celebrated pop and rock musicians have acknowledged that the young Presley inspired them. The Beatles were all big Presley fans. John Lennon said: "Nothing really affected me until I heard Elvis. If there hadn't been an Elvis, there wouldn't have been a Beatles." Deep Purple's Ian Gillan said: "For a young singer he was an absolute inspiration. I soaked up what he did like blotting paper... you learn by copying the maestro." Rod Stewart declared: "Elvis was the King. No doubt about it. People like myself, Mick Jagger and all the others only followed in his footsteps." Cher recalls from seeing Presley live in 1956 that he made her "realize the tremendous effect a performer could have on an audience." Bob Dylan said: "When I first heard Elvis' voice I just knew that I wasn't going to work for anybody; and nobody was going to be my boss. Hearing him for the first time was like busting out of jail."

By 1958, singers obviously adopting Presley's style, like Marty Wilde and Cliff Richard (the so-called "British Elvis"), were rising to prominence in the UK. Elsewhere, France's Johnny Hallyday and the Italians Adriano Celentano and Bobby Solo were also heavily influenced by Presley.

Presley's recorded voice is seen by many as his enduring legacy. Music critic Henry Pleasants writes: "Elvis Presley has been described variously as a baritone and a tenor. An extraordinary compass... and a very wide range of vocal color have something to do with this divergence of opinion. The voice covers two octaves and a third ... Moreover, he has not been confined to one type of vocal production. In ballads and country songs he belts out full-voiced high G's and A's that an opera baritone might envy. He is a naturally assimilative stylist with a multiplicity of voices—in fact, Elvis' is an extraordinary voice, or many voices." It has also been noted that "Presleys comprehensive musical knowledge and talent also surprised and impressed songwriters Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller... [They] considered Presley to be an 'idiot savant' because he knew so many songs. His knowledge of the blues especially impressed them. Leiber remembers that Presley "could imitate anything he heard. He had a perfect ear,"... Presley could sing and/or play a song on the piano after hearing it only once or twice. His natural ear for music, ability to play by ear, and to improvise were well known to his friends and musical associates."

Gospel tenor Shawn Nielsen, who sang backing vocals for Presley on tour, said: "He could sing anything. I've never seen such versatility... He had such great soul. He had the ability to make everyone in the audience think that he was singing directly to them. He just had a way with communication that was totally unique."

Presley's informal jamming in front of a small audience in the '68 Comeback Special is regarded as a forerunner of the so-called 'Unplugged' concept, later popularized by MTV.

The singer has been inducted into four music 'Halls of Fame': the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame (1986), the Rockabilly Hall of Fame (1997), the Country Music Hall of Fame (1998), and the Gospel Music Hall of Fame (2001). In 1984, he received the W. C. Handy Award from the Blues Foundation and the Academy of Country Musics first Golden Hat Award. In 1987, he received the American Music Awards first posthumous presentation of the Award of Merit.

Presley has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 7080 Hollywood Boulevard. He was also honored by the Mississippi Blues Commission with a Mississippi Blues Trail historic marker placed in Tupelo, his birth place, in recognition of his contribution to the development of the blues in Mississippi.

In 1994, the 40th anniversary of Presley's "That's All Right" was recognized with its re-release, which made the charts worldwide, making top three in the UK.

During the 2002 World Cup a Junkie XL remix of his "A Little Less Conversation" (credited as "Elvis Vs JXL") topped the charts in over twenty countries and was included in a compilation of Presley's U.S. and UK number one hits, .

In the UK charts (January 2005), three re-issued singles again went to number one ("Jailhouse Rock", "One Night"/"I Got Stung" and "It's Now or Never"). Throughout the year, twenty singles were re-issued—all making top five.

In the same year, Forbes magazine named Presley, for the fifth straight year, the top-earning deceased celebrity, grossing US$45 million for the Presley estate during the preceding year. In mid-2006, top place was taken by Nirvana's Kurt Cobain after the sale of his song catalogue, but Presley reclaimed the top spot in 2007.

Paul F. Campos has written: "The Elvis cult touches on so many crucial nerves of American popular culture: the ascent of a workingclass boy from the most obscure backwater to international fame and fortune; the white man with the soul of black music in his voice; the performer whose music tied together the main strands of American folk music country, rhythm and blues, and gospel; and, perhaps most compellingly for a weight-obsessed nation, the sexiest man in America's gradual transformation into a fat, sweating parody of his former self, straining the bounds of a jewel-encrusted bodysuit on a Las Vegas stage. The images of fat Elvis and thin Elvis live together in the popular imagination." The singer continues to be imitated—and parodied—outside the main music industry and Presley songs remain very popular on the karaoke circuit. People from a diversity of cultures and backgrounds work as Elvis impersonators ("the raw 1950s Elvis and the kitschy 1970s Elvis are the favorites.")

In 2002, it was observed: 

















Edgar Allan Poe

Edgar Allan Poe (January 19, 1809  October 7, 1849) was an American poet, short-story writer, editor and literary critic, and is considered part of the American Romantic Movement. Best known for his tales of mystery and the macabre, Poe was one of the earliest American practitioners of the short story and is considered the inventor of the detective-fiction genre. He is further credited with contributing to the emerging genre of science fiction. He was the first well-known American writer to try to earn a living through writing alone, resulting in a financially difficult life and career.

Born as Edgar Poe in Boston, Massachusetts, Poe's parents died when he was young. Poe was taken in by John and Frances Allan, of Richmond, Virginia, but they never formally adopted him. After spending a short period at the University of Virginia and briefly attempting a military career, Poe and the Allans parted ways. Poe's publishing career began humbly, with an anonymous collection of poems, Tamerlane and Other Poems (1827), credited only to "a Bostonian".

Poe switched his focus to prose and spent the next several years working for literary journals and periodicals, becoming known for his own style of literary criticism. His work forced him to move between several cities, including Baltimore, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania and New York City. In Baltimore in 1835, he married Virginia Clemm, his 13-year-old cousin. In January 1845, Poe published his poem "The Raven" to instant success. His wife died of tuberculosis two years later. He began planning to produce his own journal, The Penn (later renamed The Stylus), though he died before it could be produced. On October 7, 1849, at age 40, Poe died in Baltimore; the cause of his death is unknown and has been attributed to alcohol, brain congestion, cholera, drugs, heart disease, rabies, suicide, tuberculosis, and other agents.

Poe and his works influenced literature in the United States and around the world, as well as in specialized fields, such as cosmology and cryptography. Poe and his work appear throughout popular culture in literature, music, films, and television. A number of his homes are dedicated museums today.



Born Edgar Poe in Boston, Massachusetts, on January 19, 1809, the second child of actress Elizabeth Arnold Hopkins Poe and actor David Poe, Jr. He had an elder brother, William Henry Leonard Poe, and a younger sister, Rosalie Poe. Edgar may have been named after a character in William Shakespeare's King Lear, a play the couple was performing in 1809. His father abandoned their family in 1810, and his mother died a year later from consumption. Poe was then taken into the home of John Allan, a successful Scottish merchant in Richmond, Virginia, who dealt in a variety of goods including tobacco, cloth, wheat, tombstones, and slaves. The Allans served as a foster family but never formally adopted Poe, though they gave him the name "Edgar Allan Poe".

The Allan family had Poe baptized in the Episcopal Church in 1812. John Allan alternately spoiled and aggressively disciplined his foster son. The family, including Poe and Allan's wife, Frances Valentine Allan, sailed to England in 1815. Poe attended the grammar school in Irvine, Scotland (where John Allan was born) for a short period in 1815, before rejoining the family in London in 1816. He studied at a boarding school in Chelsea until summer 1817. He was subsequently entered at the Reverend John Bransbys Manor House School at Stoke Newington, then a suburb four miles (6 km) north of London.

Poe moved back with the Allans to Richmond, Virginia in 1820. In March 1825, John Allan's uncle and business benefactor William Galt, said to be one of the wealthiest men in Richmond, died and left Allan several acres of real estate. The inheritance was estimated at $750,000. By summer 1825, Allan celebrated his expansive wealth by purchasing a two-story brick home named Moldavia. Poe may have become engaged to Sarah Elmira Royster before he registered at the one-year old University of Virginia in February 1826 to study languages. The university, in its infancy, was established on the ideals of its founder, Thomas Jefferson. It had strict rules against gambling, horses, guns, tobacco and alcohol, but these rules were generally ignored. Jefferson had enacted a system of student self-government, the Honor System, allowing students to choose their own studies, make their own arrangements for boarding, and report all wrongdoing to the faculty. The unique system was still in chaos, and there was a high drop-out rate. During his time there, Poe lost touch with Royster and also became estranged from his foster father over gambling debts. Poe claimed that Allan had not given him sufficient money to register for classes, purchase texts, and procure and furnish a dormitory. Allan did send additional money and clothes, but Poe's debts increased. Poe gave up on the university after a year, and, not feeling welcome in Richmond, especially when he learned that his sweetheart Royster had married Alexander Shelton, he traveled to Boston in April 1827, sustaining himself with odd jobs as a clerk and newspaper writer. At some point he started using the pseudonym Henri Le Rennet.'''



Unable to support himself, on May 27, 1827, Poe enlisted in the United States Army as a private. Using the name "Edgar A. Perry", he claimed he was  even though he was 18. He first served at Fort Independence in Boston Harbor for five dollars a month. That same year, he released his first book, a 40-page collection of poetry, Tamerlane and Other Poems, attributed with the byline "by a Bostonian". Only 50 copies were printed, and the book received virtually no attention. Poe's regiment was posted to Fort Moultrie in Charleston, South Carolina and traveled by ship on the brig Waltham on November 8, 1827. Poe was promoted to "artificer", an enlisted tradesman who prepared shells for artillery, and had his monthly pay doubled. After serving for two years and attaining the rank of Sergeant Major for Artillery (the highest rank a noncommissioned officer can achieve), Poe sought to end his five-year enlistment early. He revealed his real name and his circumstances to his commanding officer, Lieutenant Howard. Howard would only allow Poe to be discharged if he reconciled with John Allan and wrote a letter to Allan, who was unsympathetic. Several months passed and pleas to Allan were ignored; Allan may not have written to Poe even to make him aware of his foster mother's illness. Frances Allan died on February 28, 1829, and Poe visited the day after her burial. Perhaps softened by his wife's death, John Allan agreed to support Poe's attempt to be discharged in order to receive an appointment to the United States Military Academy at West Point.

Poe finally was discharged on April 15, 1829, after securing a replacement to finish his enlisted term for him. Before entering West Point, Poe moved back to Baltimore for a time, to stay with his widowed aunt Maria Clemm, her daughter, Virginia Eliza Clemm (Poe's first cousin), his brother Henry, and his invalid grandmother Elizabeth Cairnes Poe. Meanwhile, Poe published his second book, Al Aaraaf, Tamerlane and Minor Poems, in Baltimore in 1829.

Poe traveled to West Point and matriculated as a cadet on July 1, 1830. In October 1830, John Allan married his second wife, Louisa Patterson. The marriage, and bitter quarrels with Poe over the children born to Allan out of affairs, led to the foster father finally disowning Poe. Poe decided to leave West Point by purposely getting court-martialed. On February 8, 1831, he was tried for gross neglect of duty and disobedience of orders for refusing to attend formations, classes, or church. Poe tactically pled not guilty to induce dismissal, knowing he would be found guilty.

He left for New York in February 1831, and released a third volume of poems, simply titled Poems. The book was financed with help from his fellow cadets at West Point, many of whom donated 75 cents to the cause, raising a total of $170. They may have been expecting verses similar to the satirical ones Poe had been writing about commanding officers. Printed by Elam Bliss of New York, it was labeled as "Second Edition" and included a page saying, "To the U.S. Corps of Cadets this volume is respectfully dedicated." The book once again reprinted the long poems "Tamerlane" and "Al Aaraaf" but also six previously unpublished poems including early versions of "To Helen", "Israfel", and "The City in the Sea". He returned to Baltimore, to his aunt, brother and cousin, in March 1831. His elder brother Henry, who had been in ill health in part due to problems with alcoholism, died on August 1, 1831.

After his brother's death, Poe began more earnest attempts to start his career as a writer. He chose a difficult time in American publishing to do so. He was the first well-known American to try to live by writing alone and was hampered by the lack of an international copyright law. Publishers often pirated copies of British works rather than paying for new work by Americans. The industry was also particularly hurt by the Panic of 1837. Despite a booming growth in American periodicals around this time period, fueled in part by new technology, many did not last beyond a few issues and publishers often refused to pay their writers or paid them much later than they promised. Poe, throughout his attempts at pursuing a successful literary career, would be forced to constantly make humiliating pleas for money and other assistance for the rest of his life.

After his early attempts at poetry, Poe had turned his attention to prose. He placed a few stories with a Philadelphia publication and began work on his only drama, Politian. The Saturday Visitor, a Baltimore paper, awarded Poe a prize in October 1833 for his short story "MS. Found in a Bottle". The story brought him to the attention of John P. Kennedy, a Baltimorian of considerable means. He helped Poe place some of his stories, and introduced him to Thomas W. White, editor of the Southern Literary Messenger in Richmond. Poe became assistant editor of the periodical in August 1835; however, within a few weeks, he was discharged after being found drunk repeatedly. Returning to Baltimore, Poe secretly married Virginia, his cousin, on September 22, 1835. She was 13 at the time, though she is listed on the marriage certificate as being 21. Reinstated by White after promising good behavior, Poe went back to Richmond with Virginia and her mother. He remained at the Messenger until January 1837. During this period, its circulation increased from 700 to 3,500. He published several poems, book reviews, criticism, and stories in the paper. On May 16, 1836, he had a second wedding ceremony in Richmond with Virginia Clemm, this time in public.

The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym was published and widely reviewed in 1838. In the summer of 1839, Poe became assistant editor of Burton's Gentleman's Magazine. He published numerous articles, stories, and reviews, enhancing his reputation as a trenchant critic that he had established at the Southern Literary Messenger. Also in 1839, the collection Tales of the Grotesque and Arabesque was published in two volumes, though he made little money off of it and it received mixed reviews. Poe left Burton's after about a year and found a position as assistant at Graham's Magazine.

In June 1840, Poe published a prospectus announcing his intentions to start his own journal, The Stylus. Originally, Poe intended to call the journal The Penn, as it would have been based in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. In the June 6, 1840 issue of Philadelphia's Saturday Evening Post, Poe bought advertising space for his prospectus: "Prospectus of the Penn Magazine, a Monthly Literary journal to be edited and published in the city of Philadelphia by Edgar A. Poe." The journal would never be produced before Poe's death. Around this time, he attempted to secure a position with the Tyler administration, claiming he was a member of the Whig Party. He hoped to be appointed to the Custom House in Philadelphia with help from President Tyler's son Robert, an acquaintance of Poe's friend Frederick Thomas. Poe failed to show up for a meeting with Thomas to discuss the appointment in mid-September 1842, claiming to be sick, though Thomas believed he was drunk. Though he was promised an appointment, all positions were filled by others.

One evening in January 1842, Virginia showed the first signs of consumption, now known as tuberculosis, while singing and playing the piano. Poe described it as breaking a blood vessel in her throat. She only partially recovered. Poe began to drink more heavily under the stress of Virginia's illness. He left Graham's and attempted to find a new position, for a time angling for a government post. He returned to New York, where he worked briefly at the Evening Mirror before becoming editor of the Broadway Journal and, later, sole owner. There he alienated himself from other writers by publicly accusing Henry Wadsworth Longfellow of plagiarism, though Longfellow never responded. On January 29, 1845, his poem "The Raven" appeared in the Evening Mirror and became a popular sensation. Though it made Poe a household name almost instantly, he only was paid $9 for its publication.

 Broadway Journal failed in 1846. Poe moved to a cottage in the Fordham section of The Bronx, New York. That home, known today as the "Poe Cottage", is on the southeast corner of the Grand Concourse and Kingsbridge Road. Virginia died there on January 30, 1847. Biographers and critics often suggest Poe's frequent theme of the "death of a beautiful woman" stems from the repeated loss of women throughout his life, including his wife.

Increasingly unstable after his wife's death, Poe attempted to court the poet Sarah Helen Whitman, who lived in Providence, Rhode Island. Their engagement failed, purportedly because of Poe's drinking and erratic behavior. However, there is also strong evidence that Whitman's mother intervened and did much to derail their relationship. Poe then returned to Richmond and resumed a relationship with a childhood sweetheart, Sarah Elmira Royster.

On October 3, 1849, Poe was found on the streets of Baltimore delirious, "in great distress, and... in need of immediate assistance", according to the man who found him, Joseph W. Walker. He was taken to the Washington College Hospital, where he died on Sunday, October 7, 1849, at 5:00 in the morning. Poe was never coherent long enough to explain how he came to be in his dire condition, and, oddly, was wearing clothes that were not his own. Poe is said to have repeatedly called out the name "Reynolds" on the night before his death, though it is unclear to whom he was referring. Some sources say Poe's final words were "Lord help my poor soul." All medical records, including his death certificate, have been lost. Newspapers at the time reported Poe's death as "congestion of the brain" or "cerebral inflammation", common euphemisms for deaths from disreputable causes such as alcoholism. However, the actual cause of death remains a mystery; from as early as 1872, cooping was commonly believed to have been the cause, and speculation has included delirium tremens, heart disease, epilepsy, syphilis, meningeal inflammation, cholera and rabies.

The day Edgar Allan Poe was buried, a long obituary appeared in the New York Tribune signed "Ludwig". It was soon published throughout the country. The piece began, "Edgar Allan Poe is dead. He died in Baltimore the day before yesterday. This announcement will startle many, but few will be grieved by it." "Ludwig" was soon identified as Rufus Wilmot Griswold, an editor, critic and anthologist who had borne a grudge against Poe since 1842. Griswold somehow became Poe's literary executor and attempted to destroy his enemy's reputation after his death.

Rufus Griswold wrote a biographical article of Poe called "Memoir of the Author", which he included in an 1850 volume of the collected works. Griswold depicted Poe as a depraved, drunk, drug-addled madman and included Poe's letters as evidence. Many of his claims were either outright lies or distorted half-truths. For example, it is now known that Poe was not a drug addict. Griswold's book was denounced by those who knew Poe well, but it became a popularly accepted one. This occurred in part because it was the only full biography available and was widely reprinted and in part because readers thrilled at the thought of reading works by an "evil" man. Letters that Griswold presented as proof of this depiction of Poe were later revealed as forgeries.



Poe's best known fiction works are Gothic, a genre he followed to appease the public taste. His most recurring themes deal with questions of death, including its physical signs, the effects of decomposition, concerns of premature burial, the reanimation of the dead, and mourning. Many of his works are generally considered part of the dark romanticism genre, a literary reaction to transcendentalism, which Poe strongly disliked. He referred to followers of the movement as "Frogpondians" after the pond on Boston Common. and ridiculed their writings as "metaphor-run", lapsing into "obscurity for obscurity's sake" or "mysticism for mysticism's sake." Poe once wrote in a letter to Thomas Holley Chivers that he did not dislike Transcendentalists, "only the pretenders and sophists among them."

Beyond horror, Poe also wrote satires, humor tales, and hoaxes. For comic effect, he used irony and ludicrous extravagance, often in an attempt to liberate the reader from cultural conformity. In fact, "Metzengerstein", the first story that Poe is known to have published, and his first foray into horror, was originally intended as a burlesque satirizing the popular genre. Poe also reinvented science fiction, responding in his writing to emerging technologies such as hot air balloons in "The Balloon-Hoax".

Poe wrote much of his work using themes specifically catered for mass market tastes. To that end, his fiction often included elements of popular pseudosciences such as phrenology and physiognomy.

Poe's writing reflects his literary theories, which he presented in his criticism and also in essays such as "The Poetic Principle". He disliked didacticism and allegory, though he believed that meaning in literature should be an undercurrent just beneath the surface. Works with obvious meanings, he wrote, cease to be art. He believed that quality work should be brief and focus on a specific single effect. To that end, he believed that the writer should carefully calculate every sentiment and idea. In "The Philosophy of Composition", an essay in which Poe describes his method in writing "The Raven", he claims to have strictly followed this method. It has been questioned, however, if he really followed this system. T. S. Eliot said: "It is difficult for us to read that essay without reflecting that if Poe plotted out his poem with such calculation, he might have taken a little more pains over it: the result hardly does credit to the method." Biographer Joseph Wood Krutch described the essay as "a rather highly ingenious exercise in the art of rationalization".

During his lifetime, Poe was mostly recognized as a literary critic. Fellow critic James Russell Lowell called him "the most discriminating, philosophical, and fearless critic upon imaginative works who has written in America", though he questioned if he occasionally used prussic acid instead of ink. Poe was also known as a writer of fiction and became one of the first American authors of the 19th century to become more popular in Europe than in the United States. Poe is particularly respected in France, in part due to early translations by Charles Baudelaire. Baudelaire's translations became definitive renditions of Poe's work throughout Europe.

Poe's early detective fiction tales starring the fictitious C. Auguste Dupin laid the groundwork for future detectives in literature. Sir Arthur Conan Doyle said, "Each [of Poe's detective stories] is a root from which a whole literature has developed.... Where was the detective story until Poe breathed the breath of life into it?" The Mystery Writers of America have named their awards for excellence in the genre the "Edgars". Poe's work also influenced science fiction, notably Jules Verne, who wrote a sequel to Poe's novel The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym of Nantucket called The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym, Le sphinx des glaces. Science fiction author H. G. Wells noted, "Pym tells what a very intelligent mind could imagine about the south polar region a century ago."

Like many famous artists, Poe's works have spawned innumerable imitators. One interesting trend among imitators of Poe, however, has been claims by clairvoyants or psychics to be "channeling" poems from Poe's spirit. One of the most notable of these was Lizzie Doten, who in 1863 published Poems from the Inner Life, in which she claimed to have "received" new compositions by Poe's spirit. The compositions were re-workings of famous Poe poems such as "The Bells", but which reflected a new, positive outlook.

Even so, Poe has not received only praise. William Butler Yeats was generally critical of Poe and denounced him as "vulgar". Transcendentalist Ralph Waldo Emerson reacted to "The Raven" by saying, "I see nothing in it" and derisively referred to Poe as "the jingle man". Aldous Huxley wrote that Poe's writing "falls into vulgarity" by being "too poetical" - the equivalent of wearing a diamond ring on every finger.

, an essay written in 1848, included a cosmological theory that presaged the big bang theory by 80 years, as well as the first plausible solution to Olbers' paradox. Poe eschewed the scientific method in Eureka and instead wrote from pure intuition. For this reason, he considered it a work of art, not science, but insisted that it was still true and considered it to be his career masterpiece. Even so, Eureka is full of scientific errors. In particular, Poe's suggestions opposed Newtonian principles regarding the density and rotation of planets.

Poe had a keen interest in the field of cryptography. He had placed a notice of his abilities in the Philadelphia paper Alexander's Weekly (Express) Messenger, inviting submissions of ciphers, which he proceeded to solve. In July 1841, Poe had published an essay called "A Few Words on Secret Writing" in Graham's Magazine. Realizing the public interest in the topic, he wrote "The Gold-Bug" incorporating ciphers as part of the story. Poe's success in cryptography relied not so much on his knowledge of that field (his method was limited to the simple substitution cryptogram), as on his knowledge of the magazine and newspaper culture. His keen analytical abilities, which were so evident in his detective stories, allowed him to see that the general public was largely ignorant of the methods by which a simple substitution cryptogram can be solved, and he used this to his advantage. The sensation Poe created with his cryptography stunt played a major role in popularizing cryptograms in newspapers and magazines.

Poe had an influence on cryptography beyond increasing public interest in his lifetime. William Friedman, America's foremost cryptologist, was heavily influenced by Poe. Friedman's initial interest in cryptography came from reading "The Gold-Bug" as a child  interest he later put to use in deciphering Japan's PURPLE code during World War II.

The historical Edgar Allan Poe has appeared as a fictionalized character, often representing the "mad genius" or "tormented artist" and exploiting his personal struggles. Many such depictions also blend in with characters from his stories, suggesting Poe and his characters share identities. Often, fictional depictions of Poe use his mystery-solving skills in such novels as The Poe Shadow by Matthew Pearl.



No childhood home of Poe is still standing, including the Allan family's Moldavia estate. The oldest standing home in Richmond, the Old Stone House, is in use as the Edgar Allan Poe Museum, though Poe never lived there. The collection includes many items Poe used during his time with the Allan family and also features several rare first printings of Poe works. The dorm room Poe is believed to have used while studying at the University of Virginia in 1826 is preserved and available for visits. Its upkeep is now overseen by a group of students and staff known as the Raven Society.

The earliest surviving home in which Poe lived is in Baltimore, preserved as the Edgar Allan Poe House and Museum. Poe is believed to have lived in the home at the age of 23 when he first lived with Maria Clemm and Virginia (as well as his grandmother and possibly his brother William Henry Leonard Poe). It is open to the public and is also the home of the Edgar Allan Poe Society. Of the several homes that Poe, his wife Virginia, and his mother-in-law Maria rented in Philadelphia, only the last house has survived. The Spring Garden home, where the author lived in 18431844, is today preserved by the National Park Service as the Edgar Allan Poe National Historic Site. Poe's final home is preserved as the Edgar Allan Poe Cottage in the Bronx, New York.

Other Poe landmarks include a building in the Upper West Side, where Poe temporarily lived when he first moved to New York. A plaque suggests that Poe wrote "The Raven" here. In Boston, a plaque hangs near the building where Poe was born once stood. Believed to have been located at 62 Carver Street (now Charles Street), the plaque is possibly in an incorrect location. The bar in which legend says Poe was last seen drinking before his death still stands in Fells Point in Baltimore, Maryland. Now known as The Horse You Came In On, local lore insists that a ghost they call "Edgar" haunts the rooms above.

Adding to the mystery surrounding Poe's death, an unknown visitor affectionately referred to as the "Poe Toaster" has paid homage to Poe's grave every year since 1949. As the tradition has been carried on for more than 50 years, it is likely that the "Poe Toaster" is actually several individuals; however, the tribute is always the same. Every January 19, in the early hours of the morning, the man makes a toast of cognac to Poe's original grave marker and leaves three roses. Members of the Edgar Allan Poe Society in Baltimore have helped in protecting this tradition for decades. On August 15, 2007, Sam Porpora, a former historian at the Westminster Church in Baltimore where Poe is buried, claimed that he had started the tradition in the 1960s. The claim that the tradition began in 1949, he said, was a hoax in order to raise money and enhance the profile of the church. His story has not been confirmed, and some details he has given to the press have been pointed out as factually inaccurate.



Tales

Poetry

Other works









About Poe

Works







December 19







Alfonso V of Aragon

Alfonso the Magnanimous (also Alphonso; Catalan: Alfons) (1396 – 27 June 1458) was the King of Aragon (as Alfonso V), Valencia (as Alfonso III), Majorca, Sardinia and Corsica (as Alfonso II), and Sicily and Count of Barcelona (as Alfonso IV) from 1416 and King of Naples (as Alfonso I) from 1442 until his death. He was one of the most prominent figures of the early Renaissance and a knight of the Order of the Dragon. 

He was the son of Ferdinand I of Aragon (known as Ferdinand of Antequera) and Eleanor of Alburquerque. He represented the old line of the counts of Barcelona only through women, and was on his father's side descended from the House of Trastamara, a noble family of Castile. By hereditary right he was king of Sicily and disputed the island of Sardinia with Genoa. Alfonso was also in possession of much of Corsica by the 1420s.

In 1421 Queen Joan II of Naples, who had no children, adopted and named him as heir to the Kingdom of Naples, and Alfonso went to Naples. Here he hired the famous condottiero Braccio da Montone with the task of reducing the resistance of the other pretender, Louis III of Anjou, and his forces led by Muzio Attendolo Sforza. As Pope Martin V supported Sforza, Alfonso switched religious allegiance to the Aragonese antipope Benedict XIII. When Sforza also abandoned Louis, Alfonso seemed to have all his problems solved; however, his relationship with Joanna suddenly worsened, and in May 1423 he had her lover, and a powerful figure in the Neapolitan court, Gianni Caracciolo, arrested. After an attempt to arrest the queen herself failed, Joanna called Sforza who defeated the Aragonese milices near Castel Capuano in Naples. Alfonso fled to Castel Nuovo, but the help of a fleet of 22 galleys led by Giovanni da Cardona improved his situation. Sforza and Joanna ransomed Caracciolo and retreated to the fortress of Aversa. Here she repudiated her earlier adoption of Alfonso and, with support from Martin V, named Louis III as her heir instead. The Milanese Filippo Maria Visconti joined the anti-Aragonese coalition. Alfonso requested support from Braccio da Montone, who was besieging Joanna's troops in L'Aquila, but had to set sail for Spain, where a war had broken out between his brothers and the Kingdom of Castile. On his way towards Barcelona, he destroyed Marseille, a possession of Louis III.



In the late 1423 the Genoese fleet of Visconti moved in the southern Tyrrhenian Sea and easily conquered Gaeta, Procida, Castellammare and Sorrento. Naples, which was held by Alfonso's brother, Pedro, was besieged in 1424 by the Genoese ships and Joanna's troops, now led by Francesco Sforza, son of Muzio (who had died at L'Aquila). The city fell in the April of that year. Pedro, after a short resistance in Castel Nuovo, fled to Sicily in August. Joanna II and Louis III again took possession of the realm, although the true power was in the hands of Gianni Caracciolo.

An opportunity for Alfonso to reconquer Naples occurred in 1432, when Caracciolo was killed in a conjure. Alfonso tried to regain the favour of the queen, but failed, and had to wait for the death of both Louis (at Cosenza in 1434) and Joanna herself (February 1435). In her will, she bequeathed her realm to Ren of Anjou, Louis III's brother. This solution was opposed by the new pope, Eugene IV, who was nominal feudal lord of the King of Naples. As the Neapolitans had called for the French, Alfonso decided to intervene and, with the support of several barons of the kingdom, captured Capua and besieged the important sea fortress of Gaeta. His fleet of 25 galleys was met by the Genoese ships sent by Visconti, led by Biagio Assereto. In the battle that ensued, Alfonso was defeated and taken prisoner.

In Milan, however, he impressed his captor with his cultured demeanor and persuaded him to let him go by making it plain that it was not in Milan's interest to prevent the victory of the Aragonese party in Naples. Helped by a Sicilian fleet, Alfonso recaptured Capua and set his base in Gaeta in the February of 1436. Papal troops had invaded the Neapolitan kingdom, but Alfonso corrupted the cardinal Giovanni Vitelleschi, who commanded them, and his successes waned. 



In the meantime, Ren had managed to reach Naples on may 19, 1438. Alfonso tried to besiege the city in the following September, but failed. His brother Pedro was killed during the battle. Castel Nuovo, where an Aragonese garrison resisted, fell to the Angevine mercenaries in the August of 1439. After the death of his condottiero Jacopo Caldora, however, Ren's fortune started to wane: Alfonso could easily capture Aversa, Salerno, Benevento, Manfredonia and Bitonto. Ren, whose possession included now only part of the Abruzzi and Naples, obtained 10,000 men from the pope, but the cardinal leading them signed a truce with Alfonso. Giovanni Sforza came with a reduced corps, as troops sent by Eugene IV had halted his father Francesco in the Marche. 

Alfonso, who was provided with the most impressive artillery of the time, again besieged Naples. The siege began on November 10, 1441, and ended on June 2 of the following year. After the return of Ren to Provence, Alfonso easily reduced the remaining resistance and made his triumphal entrance in Naples on February 26, 1443, as the monarch of a pacified kingdom. In 1446 he conquered also Sardinia, becoming the head of the most important kingdom of western Europe. 



Alfonso had been betrothed to Mara de Castilla (1401–1458; sister of Juan II of Castile) in Valladolid in 1408; the marriage was celebrated in Valencia during 1415. They failed to produce children. Alfonso had been in love with a woman of noble family named Lucrezia d'Alagno, who served as a de facto queen at the Neapolitan court as well as an inspiring muse.

His Spanish possessions were ruled for him by his brother John. Alfonso, by formally submitting his reign to the Papacy, obtained the consent of Pope Eugene IV that the Kingdom of Naples would go to his immature son Ferdinand. He died in Castel dell'Ovo in 1458, while he was planning the conquest of Genoa. At the time, Alfonso was at odds with Callixtus III, who died shortly thereafter.

Sicily and Sardinia were inherited by his brother John, who survived him.

He was also a powerful and consistent supporter of Scanderbeg, whom he decided to take under his protection as a vassal in 1451, shortly after the latter had scored his second victory against Murad II. In addition to financial assistance, he supplied the Albanian leader with troops, military equipment, and sanctuary for himself and his family if such a need should arise. This was because in 1448, while Scanderbeg was victoriously fighting off the Turkish invasions, three military columns, commanded by Demetrio Reres along with his sons Giorgio and Basilio, were dispatched to help Alfonso V defeat the barons of Naples who had rebelled against him.

Like a true prince of the Renaissance he favoured men of letters whom he trusted to preserve his reputation to posterity. He founded the Academy of Naples and, for his entrance in the city in 1443, had a magnificent triumphal arch added to the main gate of Castel Nuovo. This edifice, considered the most important civil piece of art of the time, was designed by Francesco Laurana. His devotion to the classics was exceptional even for the time. For example, Alfonso halted his army in pious respect before the birthplace of a Latin writer, carried Livy or Caesar on his campaigns with him, and his panegyrist Panormita even stated that the king was cured of an illness when a few pages of Quintus Curtius Rufus' history of Alexander the Great were read to him. However, the classics had not refined his taste, for he was amused by setting itinerant scholars, who swarmed to his court, to abuse one another in the indescribably filthy Latin scolding matches which were then the fashion. 

After his conquest of Naples in 1442, Alfonso ruled by his mercenary soldiers and mercenary men of letters. In his Italian kingdom, he maintained the former political and administrative institutions; a unified General Chancellorship for the whole Aragonese reign was set in Naples, although the main functionaries were of Aragonese nationality. Apart from financial, administrative and artistical improvements, his other accomplishments in the Sicilian kingdom include the restoration of the aqueducts, the drainage of marshy areas, and the pavement of streets.

Alfonso was the object of diplomatic contacts from the empire of Ethiopia. In 1428, he received a letter from Yeshaq I of Ethiopia, borne by two dignitaries, which proposed an alliance against the Muslims and would be sealed by a dual marriage that would require the Infante Don Pedro to bring a group of artisans to Ethiopia where he would marry Yeshaq's daughter. In return, Alfonso sent a party of 13 craftsmen, all of whom perished on the way to Ethiopia. He later sent a letter to Yeshaq's successor Zara Yaqob in 1450, in which he wrote that he would be happy to send artisans to Ethiopia if their safe arrival could be guaranteed, but it probably never reached the Emperor.









Barry Bonds

Barry Lamar Bonds (born July 24, 1964) is a Major League Baseball outfielder who is currently a free agent. He is the son of former major league All-Star Bobby Bonds, the godson of Hall of Famer Willie Mays, the nephew of 1964 Olympian Rosie Bonds, and a distant cousin of Hall of Famer Reggie Jackson. He debuted in the Major Leagues with the Pittsburgh Pirates in 1986 and joined the San Francisco Giants in 1993, where he stayed through 2007. Bonds filed for free agency following the 2007 World Series.

Bonds' accomplishments place him among the greatest baseball players of all-time. He has a record-setting seven Most Valuable Player awards, including a record-setting four consecutive MVPs. He is a fourteen time All-star, eight time gold glove-winner and he holds numerous Major League Baseball records. He currently holds the all-time Major League Baseball home run record with 762, and is also the all-time career leader in both walks (2,558) and intentional walks (688). He holds numerous other records, including the single-season Major League record for home runs (73), set in .

Since 2003, Bonds has been a key figure in the Bay Area Laboratory Co-operative (BALCO) scandal. He was under investigation by a federal grand jury regarding his testimony in the BALCO case, and was indicted on perjury and obstruction of justice charges on November 15, 2007. The indictment alleges that Bonds lied while under oath about his alleged use of steroids.





Born in , Bonds grew up in  and attended Junpero Serra High School in  and excelled in baseball, basketball and football. As a freshman, he spent the baseball season on the JV team. The next three years1980 to 1982he starred on the varsity team. He batted for a .467 batting average his senior year, and was honored as a prep All-American. The Giants drafted Bonds in the second round of the 1982 MLB draft as a high school senior, but the Giants and Bonds were unable to agree on contract terms, so Bonds instead decided to attend college.

Bonds attended Arizona State University, hitting .347 with 45 home runs and 175 runs batted in (RBI). In 1984 he batted .360 and had 30 stolen bases. In 1985 he hit 23 home runs with 66 RBIs and a .368 batting average. He was a Sporting News All-American selection that year. He tied the NCAA record with seven consecutive hits in the College World Series as sophomore and was named to All-Time College World Series Team in 1996. He graduated from Arizona State in 1986 with a degree in criminology. During college, he played part of one summer in the amateur Alaska Baseball League with the Alaska Goldpanners.

Bonds was drafted by the Pittsburgh Pirates in the first round (6th overall) of the  Major League Baseball draft. Bonds joined the Prince William Pirates of the Carolina League and was named July 1985 Player of the Month for the league. In , he hit .311 in 44 games for the Hawaii Islanders of the Pacific Coast League, and he made his major league debut on May 30.

In 1986, Bonds led National League (NL) rookies with 16 home runs, 48 RBI, 36 stolen bases and 65 walks, but he finished 6th in Rookie of the Year voting. He hit 25 home runs in his second season, along with 32 stolen bases and 59 RBIs. Bonds improved in 1988, hitting .283 with 24 home runs. Bonds finished with 19 homers, 58 RBIs, and 14 outfield assists, which was 2nd in NL. 

Bonds won his first MVP award in 1990, hitting .301 with 33 home runs and 114 RBIs. His 52 stolen bases were third in the league. He won his first Gold Glove and Silver Slugger Awards. In 1991, Bonds also put up great numbers, hitting 25 homers and driving in 116 runs, and obtained another Gold Glove and Silver Slugger. He finished second to the Atlanta Braves' Terry Pendleton (the NL batting champion) in the MVP voting. The next season, Bonds won his second MVP award. He dominated the NL, hitting .311 with 34 homers and 103 RBIs, and propelling the Pirates to their third straight National League East division title. However, Pittsburgh was defeated by the Braves in a seven-game National League Championship Series. Bonds was involved in the final play of Game 7 of the NLCS, where he fielded a base hit by Francisco Cabrera and attempted to throw out Sid Bream at home plate. But the throw to Pirates catcher Mike LaValliere was late and Bream scored the winning run. For the third consecutive season, the NL East Champion Pirates were denied a trip to the World Series.

In 1993, Bonds left the Pirates to sign a lucrative free agent contract worth a then-record $43.75 million over 6 years with the Giants, with whom his father spent the first 7 years of his career, and with whom his godfather Willie Mays played 22 of his 24 Major League seasons. The deal was at that time the largest in baseball history, in terms of both total value and average annual salary. To honor his father, Bonds switched his jersey number to 25 once he signed with the Giants, as it had been Bobby's number in San Francisco. (His number during most of his stay with the Pirates, 24, was retired in honor of Mays anyway). Bonds hit .336 in 1993, leading the league with 46 home runs and 123 RBI en route to his second consecutive MVP award, and third overall. As good as the Giants were (winning 103 games), the Atlanta Braves won 104 in what some call the last great pennant race (due to the Wild Card being instituted shortly after).

In the strike-shortened season of , Bonds hit .312 with 37 home runs and a league-leading 74 walks, and he finished 4th in MVP voting. In , Bonds hit 33 homers and drove in 104 runs, hitting .294 but finished only 12th in MVP voting.

In , Bonds became the first National League player and second (of the current list of four) major league player(s) to hit 40 home runs and steal 40 bases in the same season. The other members of the 40-40 club are Jos Canseco1988, Alex Rodriguez1998, and Alfonso Soriano2006; his father Bobby Bonds was one home run short in 1973 when he hit 39 home runs and stole 43 bases. Bonds drove in 129 runs with a .308 average and walked a then-National League record 151 times. During the 1996 season Bonds became the 4th player in history to steal 300 bases and hit 300 home runs for a career, joining Willie Mays, Andre Dawson, and Bobby Bonds in the 300-300 club, but he only finished fifth in the MVP balloting. In  Bonds hit .291, his lowest average since 1989. He hit 40 home runs for the second straight year and drove in 101 runs, leading the league in walks again with 145. He tied his father in 1997 for having the most 30/30 seasons, and he again placed fifth in the MVP balloting.

In , he hit .303 with 37 home runs and drove in 122 runs, winning his eighth Gold Glove, and became the first player ever to enter the 400-400 club by having career totals of 400 home runs and 400 stolen bases. With two outs in the 9th inning of a game against the Arizona Diamondbacks on May 28, 1998, Bonds became only the fifth player in baseball history to be given an intentional walk with the bases loaded. Nap Lajoie (1901), Del Bissonette (1928) and Bill Nicholson (1944) were three others in the 20th century who received that rare honor; however Abner Dalrymple was the first to receive one in 1881. Bonds finished 8th in the MVP voting.

Bill James ranked Bonds as the best player of the 1990s, adding that the decade's second-best player (Craig Biggio) had been closer in production to the decade's 10th-best player than to Bonds. In 1999, with statistics through 1997 being considered, Bonds ranked Number 34 on The Sporting News' list of the 100 Greatest Baseball Players, making him the highest-ranking active player. When the Sporting News list was redone in 2005, Bonds was ranked 6th behind Babe Ruth, Willie Mays, Ty Cobb, Walter Johnson, and Henry Aaron. Bonds was omitted from 1999's Major League Baseball All-Century Team, to which Ken Griffey, Jr. was elected. James wrote of Bonds, "Certainly the most unappreciated superstar of my lifetime... Griffey has always been more popular, but Bonds has been a far, far greater player." In 1999, James rated Bonds as the 16th best player of all time. "When people begin to take in all of his accomplishments", James predicted, "Bonds may well be rated among the five greatest players in the history of the game."



In 2000, the following year, Bonds hit .306 with a slugging percentage of .688 (career best at that time) and hit 49 home runs in just 143 games (also a career high to that point), while drawing a league-leading 117 walks.

The next year, Bonds' offensive production reached even higher levels, breaking not only his own personal records but several major league records. In the Giants' first 50 games in 2001, Bonds hit 28 home runs, including 17 in Maya career high. He also hit 39 home runs by the All-star break (a major league record), drew a major league record 177 walks, and had a .515 on-base average, a feat not seen since Mickey Mantle and Ted Williams over forty years earlier. Bonds' slugging percentage was a major league record .863 (411 total bases in 476 at-bats), and, most impressively, he ended the season with a major league record 73 home runs. 

Bonds re-signed with the Giants for a five-year, $90 million contract in January 2002. That year, he hit 46 home runs in 403 at-bats. He won the NL batting title with a career-high .370 average and struck out only 47 times. Despite playing in nine fewer games than the previous season, he drew 198 walks, a major-league record, 68 of them intentional. He slugged .799, then the fourth-highest total all time. Bonds broke Ted Williams' major league record for on-base average with .582. Bonds also hit his 600th home run, less than a year and a half after hitting his 500th. 

In 2003, Bonds played in just 130 games. He hit 45 home runs in just 390 at-bats, along with a .341 batting average. He slugged .749, walked 148 times, and had an on-base average well over .500 (.529) for the third straight year. He also became the only member of the career 500 home run/500 stolen base club.

In 2004, Bonds had perhaps his best season. He hit .362 en route to his second National League batting title, and broke his own record by walking 232 times. He slugged .812, which was fourth-highest of all time, and broke his on-base percentage record with a .609 average. Bonds passed Mays on the career home run list, hitting his 700th near the end of the season. Bonds hit 45 home runs in 373 at-bats, and struck out just 41 times, putting himself in elite company, as few major leaguers have ever had more home runs than strikeouts in a season. Bonds would win his fourth consecutive MVP award and his seventh overall. His seven MVP awards are four more than any other player in history. In addition, no other player from either league has been awarded the MVP four times in a row. (The MVP award was first given in 1931). On July 4, 2004 he tied and passed Rickey Henderson's career bases on balls record with his 2190th and 2191st career walks..

As Bonds neared Aaron's record, Aaron was called on for his opinion of Bonds. He clarified that he was a fan and admirer of Bonds and avoided the controversy regarding whether the record should be denoted with an asterisk due Bonds' to alleged steroid usage. He felt recognition and respect for the award was something to be determined by the fans. As the steroid controversy received greater media attention during the offseason before the 2005 season, Aaron expressed some reservations about the statements Bonds made on the issue. Aaron expressed that he felt drug and steroid use to boost athletic performance was inappropriate. Aaron was frustrated that the media could not focus on events that occurred in the field of play and wished drugs or gambling allegations such as those associated with Pete Rose could be emphasized less. In 2007, Aaron felt the whole steroid use issue was very controversial and decided that he would not attend any possible record-breaking games. Aaron congratulated Bonds through the media when Bonds broke Aaron's record.

Bonds' salary for the 2005 season was $22 million, the second-highest salary in Major League Baseball (the Yankees' Alex Rodriguez earned the highest, $25.2 million).Bonds endured a knee injury, multiple surgeries, and rehabilitation. He was activated on September 12, 2005, and started in left field. In his return against the San Diego Padres, he nearly hit a home run in his first at-bat. Bonds finished the night 1-for-4. Upon his return, Bonds resumed his high-caliber performance at the plate, hitting home runs in four consecutive games from September 18, 2005 to September 21, 2005 and finishing with five homers in only 14 games.

In 2006, Bonds earned $20 million (not including bonuses), the fourth highest salary in baseball. Through the 2006 season he had earned approximately $172 million during his then 21-year career, making him baseball's all-time highest paid player.Bonds hit under .200 for his first 10 games of the season and did not hit a home run until April 22, 2006. This 10-game stretch was his longest home run slump since the 1998 season. On May 7, 2006, Bonds drew within one home run of tying Babe Ruth for second place on the all time list, hitting his 713th career home run into the second level of Citizens Bank Park in Philadelphia, off pitcher Jon Lieber in an ESPN nationally-televised game in which the Giants lost to the Philadelphia Phillies. The towering home runone of the longest in Citizens Bank Park's two-season history, traveling an estimated 450 feet (140 m)hit off the facade of the third deck in right field.

Then, on May 20, 2006, Bonds tied Ruth, hitting his 714th career home run to deep right field to lead off the top of the 2nd inning. The home run came off left-handed pitcher Brad Halsey of the Oakland A's, in an interleague game played in Oakland, California. Since this was an interleague game at an American League stadium, Bonds was batting as the designated hitter in the lineup for the Giants. Bonds was quoted after the game as being "glad it's over with" and stated that more attention could be focused on Albert Pujols, who was on a very rapid home run pace in early 2006.

 On May 28, 2006, Bonds passed Ruth, hitting his 715th career home run to center field off Colorado Rockies pitcher Byung-Hyun Kim. The ball was hit an estimated 445 feet (140 m) into center field where it went through the hands of several fans but then fell onto an elevated platform in center field. Then it rolled off the platform where Andrew Morbitzer, a 38-year-old San Francisco resident, caught the ball while he was in line at a concession stand. Mysteriously, radio broadcaster Dave Flemming's radio play-by-play of the home run went silent just as the ball was hit, apparently from a microphone failure. But the televised version, called by Giants broadcaster Duane Kuiper, was not affected.

On September 22, 2006, Bonds tied Henry Aaron's National League career home run record of 733. The home run came in the top of the 6th inning of a high-scoring game against the Milwaukee Brewers, at Miller Park in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. The achievement was notable for its occurrence in the very city where Aaron began (with the Milwaukee Braves) and concluded (with the Brewers, then in the American League) his career. With the Giants trailing 10–8, Bonds hit a blast to deep center field on a 2–0 pitch off the Brewers' Chris Spurling with runners on first and second and one out. Though the Giants were at the time clinging to only a slim chance of making the playoffs, Bonds' home run provided the additional drama of giving the Giants an 11–10 lead late in a critical game in the final days of a pennant race. The Brewers eventually won the game, 13–12, despite Bonds' going 3 for 5, with 2 doubles, the record-tying home run, and 6 runs batted in.

On the following day, September 23, 2006, Bonds surpassed Aaron for the NL career home run record. Hit in Milwaukee like the previous one, this was a solo home run off Chris Capuano of the Brewers. This was the last home run Bonds hit in 2006. In 2006, Bonds recorded his lowest slugging percentage (a statistic that he has historically ranked among league leaders season after season) since 1991 with the Pittsburgh Pirates.

In January 2007, the New York Daily News reported that Bonds had tested positive for amphetamines. Under baseball's amphetamine policy, which had been in effect for one season, players testing positive were to submit to six additional tests and undergo treatment and counseling. The policy also stated that players were not to be identified for a first positive test, but the New York Daily News leaked the test's results. When the Players Association informed Bonds of the test results, he initially attributed it to a substance he had taken from the locker of Giants teammate Mark Sweeney, but would later retract this claim and publicly apologize to Sweeney.

On January 29, 2007, the Giants finalized a contract with Bonds for the 2007 season. After the commissioner's office rejected Bonds's one-year, $15.8 million deal because it contained a personal-appearance provision, the team sent revised documents to his agent, Jeff Borris, who stated that "At this time, Barry is not signing the new documents."Bonds signed a revised one-year, $15.8 million contract on February 15, 2007, and reported to the Giants' Spring Training camp on time.

Bonds resumed his march to the all-time record early in the 2007 season. After an opening game in which all he had was a first-inning single past third base against a right-shifted infield (immediately followed by a stolen base and then a base-running misjudgment that got him thrown out at home) and a deep out to left field late in the game, Bonds returned the next day, April 4, 2007, with another mission. In his first at-bat of the season's second game at the Giants' AT&T Park, Bonds hit a Chris Young (of the San Diego Padres) pitch just over the wall to the left of straightaway center field for career home run 735. This home run put Bonds past the midway point between Ruth and Aaron.

Bonds did not homer again until April 13, 2007 when he hit two (736 and 737) in a 3 for 3 night that included 4 RBI against the Pittsburgh Pirates. Home runs number 739 and 740 came in back to back games on April 21, 2007 and April 22, 2007 against the Arizona Diamondbacks. 

The hype surrounding Bonds' pursuit of the home run record escalated on May 14, 2007. On this day, Sports Auction for Heritage (a Dallas-based auction house) offered US$1 million to the fan that caught Bonds' record-breaking 756th-career home run. The million dollar offer was rescinded on June 11, 2007 out of concern of fan safety. On that same day, Bonds launched home run 747, ending the relative drought of the previous month. This one came off Josh Towers of the Toronto Blue Jays, and landed in AT&T Park's right center field stands. His next home run, 748, came on Father's Day, June 17, 2007, in the final game of a 3-game road series against the Boston Red Sox at Fenway Park, where Bonds had never previously played. With this homer, Fenway Park became the 36th major league ballpark in which Bonds had hit a home run. He hit a Tim Wakefield knuckleball just over the low fence into the Giant's bullpen in right field. It was his first home run off his former Pittsburgh Pirate teammate, who became the 441st different pitcher to surrender a four-bagger to Bonds. The 750th career home run, hit on June 29, 2007, also came off a former teammate: Livn Hernndez. The blast came in the 8th inning and at that point tied the game at 3–3.

On July 19, 2007, after a 21 at-bat hitless streak, Bonds hit 2 home runs, numbers 752 and 753 against the Chicago Cubs. He went 33 with 2 home runs, 6 RBIs, and a walk on that day. The struggling last place Giants still lost the game 9–8. On July 27, 2007, Bonds hit home run 754 against Florida Marlins pitcher Rick VandenHurk. Bonds was then walked his next 4 at bats in the game, but 2-run shot helped the Giants win the game 12–10. It marked the first game Bonds had homered in that the Giants won since he had hit #747. On August 4, 2007, Bonds hit a 382 foot (116 m) home run against Clay Hensley of the San Diego Padres for home run number 755, tying Hank Aaron's all-time record. Bonds greeted his son, Nikolai, with an extended bear hug after crossing home plate. Bonds greeted his teammates and then his wife, Liz Watson, and daughter Aisha Lynn behind the backstop. Hensley was the 445th different pitcher to give up a home run to Bonds. Ironically, given the cloud of suspicion that surrounded Bonds, the tying home run was hit off a pitcher who'd been suspended by baseball in 2005 for steroid use. He was walked in his next at bat and eventually scored on a fielder's choice.

On August 7, 2007 at 8:51 PM PDT, Bonds hit a 435 foot (133 m) home run, his 756th, off a pitch from Mike Bacsik of the Washington Nationals, breaking the all-time career home run record, formerly held by Hank Aaron. Coincidentally, Bacsik's father had faced Aaron (as a pitcher for the Texas Rangers) after Aaron had hit his 755th home run. On August 23, 1976, Michael J. Bacsik held Aaron to a single and a fly out to right field. The younger Bacsik commented later, "If my dad had been gracious enough to let Hank Aaron hit a home run, we both would have given up 756." After hitting the home run, Bonds gave Bacsik an autographed bat.

The pitch, the seventh of the at-bat, was a 32 pitch which Bonds hit into the right-center field bleachers. The fan who ended up with the ball, 22-year-old Matt Murphy from Queens, New York (and a Met fan), was promptly protected and escorted away from the mayhem by a group of San Francisco police officers. After Bonds finished his home run trot, a ten-minute delay followed, including a brief video by Aaron congratulating Bonds on breaking the record Aaron had held for 33 years, and expressing the hope that "the achievement of this record will inspire others to chase their own dreams." Bonds made an impromptu emotional statement on the field, with Willie Mays, his godfather, at his side and thanked his teammates, family and his late father. Bonds sat out the rest of the game and was replaced in left field.

The commissioner, Bud Selig, was not in attendance in this game but was represented by the Executive Vice President of Baseball Operations, Jimmie Lee Solomon. Selig called Bonds later that night to congratulate him on breaking the record. President George W. Bush also called Bonds the next day to congratulate him. On August 24, 2007, San Francisco honored and celebrated Bonds' career accomplishments and breaking the home run record with a large rally in Justin Herman Plaza. The rally included video messages from Lou Brock, Ernie Banks, Ozzie Smith, Joe Montana, Wayne Gretzky and Michael Jordan. Speeches were made by Willie Mays, Giants teammates Omar Vizquel and Rich Aurilia, and Giants owner Peter Magowan. Mayor Gavin Newsom presented Bonds the key to the City and County of San Francisco and Giants vice president Larry Baer gave Bonds the home plate he touched after hitting his 756th career home run.

The record-setting ball was consigned to an auction house on August 21, 2007, and sold with a winning bid of USD$752,467 on September 15, 2007. The high bidder, fashion designer Marc Ecko, created a website to let fans decide its fate.Ben Padnos, who submitted the (US) $186,750 winning bid on Bonds' record-tying 755th home run ball also set up a website to let fans decide its fate. Of Ecko's plans, Bonds said "He spent $750,000 on the ball and that's what he's doing with it? What he's doing is stupid."

Bonds concluded the 2007 season with a .276 batting average, 28 home runs, and 66 RBIs in 126 games and 340 at bats. At the age of 43, he led both leagues in walks with 132.

On September 21, 2007, the San Francisco Giants confirmed that they would not re-sign Bonds for the 2008 season. The story was first announced on Bonds' own web site earlier that day. He filed for free agency on October 29, 2007.

There was much speculation about where Bonds might play in 2008 and possibly beyond. During the offseason, experts suggested nearly a dozen teams as possible destinations. Most talk was of Bonds signing for only the 2008 season as he needs just 65 hits to reach 3,000 and 38 home runs to reach 800. In addition to the hits, Bonds needs 69 more runs scored to move past Rickey Henderson as the all-time runs champion. He needs 38 extra base hits to move past Hank Aaron as the all-time extra base hits champion. Bonds also continues to talk of his quest for a World Series championship as motivation for returning.

Since filing for free agency, Bonds has said he is ready to play and would like to be signed. During the 2008 season, teams said to have been contemplating signing Bonds include the Detroit Tigers, the Boston Red Sox, and the New York Yankees. However, as of early September 2008 he had not yet been signed.

In 2003, Bonds became embroiled in a scandal when Greg Anderson of the Bay Area Laboratory Co-operative (henceforth BALCO), Bonds' trainer since 2000, was indicted by a federal grand jury in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California and charged with supplying anabolic steroids to athletes, including a number of baseball players. This led to speculation that Bonds had used performance-enhancing drugs during a time when there was no mandatory testing in Major League Baseball. Bonds declared his innocence, attributing his changed physique and increased power to a strict regimen of bodybuilding, diet and legitimate supplements. 

During grand jury testimony on December 4, 2003which was later found to be obtained through an illegal leak by Troy Ellerman, a defense lawyer for Victor Conte, to the San Francisco Chronicle (leaking grand jury testimony is a felony, to which Ellerman pled guilty to on February 14, 2007) and published almost a year later, on December 3, 2004Bonds said that he used a clear substance and a cream that he received from his personal strength trainer, Greg Anderson, who told him they were the nutritional supplement flaxseed oil and a rubbing balm for arthritis. This testimony, as reported by Lance Williams and Mark Fainaru-Wada, has frequently been misrepresented. Later reports on Bonds's leaked grand-jury testimony contend that he admitted to unknowingly using "the cream" and "the clear".

In July 2005, all four defendants in the BALCO steroid scandal trial, including Anderson, struck deals with federal prosecutors that did not require them to reveal names of athletes who may have used banned drugs.

Bonds withdrew from the MLB Players Association's (MLBPA) licensing agreement because he felt independent marketing deals would be more lucrative for him. Bonds is the first player in the thirty-year history of the licensing program not to sign. Because of this withdrawal, his name and likeness are not usable in any merchandise licensed by the MLBPA. In order to use his name or likeness, a company must deal directly with Bonds. For this reason he does not appear in some baseball video games, forcing game-makers to create generic athletes to replace him. For example, Bonds is replaced by "Jon Dowd" in MVP Baseball 2005, 

In March, 2006 the book Game of Shadows, written by Lance Williams and Mark Fainaru-Wada, was released amid a storm of media publicity including the cover of Sports Illustrated. Initially small excerpts of the book were released by the authors in the issue of Sports Illustrated. The book alleges Bonds used stanozolol and a host of other steroids, and is perhaps most responsible for the change in public opinion regarding Bonds' steroid use.

The book contained excerpts of grand jury testimony that is supposed to be sealed and confidential by law. The authors have been steadfast in their refusal to divulge their sources, and at one point faced jail time. On February 14, 2007, Troy Ellerman, one of Victor Conte's lawyers, pled guilty to leaking grand jury testimony. Through the plea agreement, he will spend two and a half years in jail.

In May 2006, former Sports Illustrated writer Jeff Pearlman released a scathing biography of Bonds entitled Love Me, Hate Me: Barry Bonds and the Making of an Anti-Hero. The book also contained many allegations against Bonds. The book, which describes Bonds as a polarizing insufferable braggart with a legendary ego and staggering ability, relied on over five hundred interviews.

On November 15, 2007, Bonds was indicted for both four counts of perjury and one count of obstruction of justice as it relates to the government investigation of BALCO.

On February 14, 2008 a typo in court papers filed by Federal prosecutors erroneously alleged that Bonds tested positive for steroids in November, 2001, a month after hitting his record 73rd home run. The reference was meant instead to refer to a November 2000 test that had already been disclosed and previously reported. The typo sparked a brief media frenzy.

His trial for obstruction of justice is to begin on March 2, 2009. Mr Bonds is not expected to get prison time should he be convicted after a pro cyclist facing similar charges in the case was given house arrest and probation instead of jail time. 

In April 2006 and May 2006, ESPN aired a few episodes of a 10-part reality TV (unscripted, documentary-style) series starring Bonds. The show, titled Bonds on Bonds, focused on Bonds' chase of Babe Ruth's and Hank Aaron's home run records. Some felt the show should be put on hiatus until baseball investigated Bonds' steroid use allegations. The series was canceled in June 2006, ESPN and producer Tollin/Robbins Productions citing "creative control" issues with Bonds and his representatives.

Bonds met Susann ("Sun") Margreth Branco, the mother of his first two children, in  in August 1987. They eloped in  February 5, 1988. They had two children (Nikolai and Shikari) and separated in June 1994, divorced in December 1994 and had their marriage annulled in 1997 by the Catholic Church. The divorce was a media affair because Bonds had his Swedish spouse sign a prenuptial agreement in which she "waived her right to a share of his present and future earnings" and which was upheld. Bonds had been providing his wife $20,000/month in child support and $10,000 in spousal support at the time of the ruling. During the hearings to set permanent support levels, allegations of abuse came from both parties. The trial dragged on for months, but Bonds was awarded both houses and reduced support. Nikolai was a batboy for the Giants and always sat next to his dad in the dugout during games.

Bonds remarried on January 10, 1998 in the San Francisco Ritz-Carlton Hotel in front of 240 guests. Bonds lives in Los Altos Hills, California, with his second wife, Liz Watson, and their daughter Aisha. He also owns a home in the exclusive gated community of Beverly Park in Beverly Hills, CA.

Bonds also had an extensive intimate relationship with Kimberly Bell from 1994 through May, 2003. Bonds purchased a home in  for Kimberly.

Bonds has an older brother, Bobby, Jr. who was a professional baseball player. His paternal aunt, Rosie Bonds, is a former American record holder in the 80 meter hurdles, and she competed in the 1964 Olympics. He is a distant cousin of Hall of Famer Reggie Jackson.

Besides holding Major League career records in home runs (762), walks (2,558), and intentional walks (688), Bonds also leads all active players in RBI (1,996), on-base percentage (.444), runs (2,227), games (2,986), extra-base hits (1,440), at-bats per home run (12.92), and total bases (5,976). He is 2nd in doubles (601), slugging percentage (.607), stolen bases (514), at-bats (9,847), and hits (2,935), 6th in triples (77), 8th in sacrifice flies (91), and 9th in strikeouts (1,539), through September 26, 2007.

Bonds is the lone member of the 500500 club, which means he has hit at least 500 home runs (762) and stolen 500 bases (514). He is also one of only four baseball players all-time to be in the 4040 club (1996), which means he hit 40 home runs (42) and stole 40 bases (40) in the same season.

















Alexander II of Russia

Alexander (Aleksandr) II Nikolaevich () (Moscow, 29 April 1818 13 March 1881 in St. Petersburg) was the Emperor of the Russian Empire from 3 March 1855 until his assassination in 1881. He was also the Grand Duke of Finland and King of Poland until 1867 when it was annexed into the Russian Empire.

Born in 1818, he was the eldest son of Nicholas I and Charlotte of Prussia, daughter of Frederick William III of Prussia and Louise of Mecklenburg-Strelitz. His early life gave little indication of his ultimate potential; until the time of his accession in 1855, few imagined that he would be known to posterity as a leader able to implement the most challenging reforms undertaken in Russia since the reign of Peter the Great. 

In the period of over thirty-six years during which he was heir apparent, the atmosphere of St Petersburg was unfavourable to the development of any intellectual or political innovation. Government was based on principles under which all freedom of thought and all private initiative were, as far as possible, suppressed vigorously. Personal and official censorship was rife; criticism of the authorities was regarded as a serious offence. This was also regarded as one of the reasons which led to his assassination.

Under supervision of the liberal poet Vasily Zhukovsky, Alexander received the education commonly given to young Russians of good family at that time: a smattering of a great many subjects, and exposure to the chief modern European languages. He took little personal interest in military affairs to the disappointment of his father, who was passionate about the military. Alexander gave evidence of a kind disposition and a warmheartedness which were considered out of place in one destined to become a military autocrat.

Alexander II succeeded to the throne upon the death of his father in 1855. The first year of his reign was devoted to the prosecution of the Crimean War, and after the fall of Sevastopol to negotiations for peace, led by his trusted counselor, Prince Gorchakov. Then he began a period of radical reforms, encouraged by public opinion but carried out with autocratic power. All who had any pretensions to enlightenment declared loudly that the country had been exhausted and humiliated by the war, and that the only way of restoring it to its proper position in Europe was to develop its natural resources and thoroughly to reform all branches of the administration. The government therefore found in the educated classes a new-born public spirit, anxious to assist it in any work of reform that it might think fit to undertake. 

Fortunately for Russia the autocratic power was now in the hands of a man who was impressionable enough to be deeply influenced by the spirit of the time, and who had sufficient prudence and practicality to prevent his being carried away by the prevailing excitement into the dangerous region of Utopian dreaming. Unlike some of his predecessors, he had no grand, original schemes of his own to impose by force on unwilling subjects, and no pet projects to lead his judgment astray. He looked instinctively with a suspicious, critical eye upon the panaceas which more imaginative and less cautious people recommended. These character traits, together with the peculiar circumstances in which he was placed, determined the part he would play in bringing to fruition the reform aspirations of the educated classes.

However, the growth of a revolutionary movement to the "left" of the educated classes led to an abrupt end to Alexander's changes when he was assassinated by a bomb in 1881. It is interesting to note that after Alexander became tsar in 1855, he maintained a generally liberal course at the helm while providing a target for numerous assassination attempts (1866, 1873, 1880).

Though he carefully guarded his autocratic rights and privileges, and obstinately resisted all efforts to push him farther than he felt inclined to go, Alexander for several years acted somewhat like a constitutional sovereign of the continental type. Soon after the conclusion of peace, important changes were made in legislation concerning industry and commerce, and the new freedom thus afforded produced a large number of limited liability companies. Plans were formed for building a great network of railways — partly for the purpose of developing the natural resources of the country, and partly for the purpose of increasing its power for defense and attack.

Then it was found that further progress was blocked by a formidable obstacle: the existence of serfdom. Alexander showed that, unlike his father, he meant to grapple boldly with this difficult and dangerous problem. Taking advantage of a petition presented by the Polish landed proprietors of the Lithuanian provinces, and hoping that their relations with the serfs might be regulated in a more satisfactory way (meaning in a way more satisfactory for the proprietors), he authorized the formation of committees "for ameliorating the condition of the peasants," and laid down the principles on which the amelioration was to be effected.

This step was followed by one still more significant. Without consulting his ordinary advisers, Alexander ordered the Minister of the Interior to send a circular to the provincial governors of European Russia, containing a copy of the instructions forwarded to the governor-general of Lithuania, praising the supposed generous, patriotic intentions of the Lithuanian landed proprietors, and suggesting that perhaps the landed proprietors of other provinces might express a similar desire. The hint was taken: in all provinces where serfdom existed, emancipation committees were formed.

The deliberations at once raised a host of important, thorny questions. The emancipation was not merely a humanitarian question capable of being solved instantaneously by imperial ukase. It contained very complicated problems, deeply affecting the economic, social and political future of the nation.

Alexander had little of the special knowledge required for dealing successfully with such problems, and he had to restrict himself to choosing between the different measures recommended to him. The main point at issue was whether the serfs should become agricultural labourers dependent economically and administratively on the landlords, or whether they should be transformed into a class of independent communal proprietors. The emperor gave his support to the latter project, and the Russian peasantry became one of the last groups of peasants in Europe to shake off serfdom.

The architects of the emancipation manifesto were Alexander's brother Konstantin, Yakov Rostovtsev, and Nikolay Milyutin. On 3 March 1861, the sixth anniversary of his accession, the emancipation law was signed and published.

Other reforms followed: army and navy re-organization (1874); a new judicial administration based on the French model (1864); a new penal code and a greatly simplified system of civil and criminal procedure; an elaborate scheme of local self-government (Zemstvo) for the rural districts (1864) and the large towns (1870), with elective assemblies possessing a restricted right of taxation, and a new rural and municipal police under the direction of the Minister of the Interior. Alexander II would be the second monarch (after King Louis I of Portugal) to abolish capital punishment, a penalty which is still legal (although not practised) in Russia.

However, the workers wanted better working conditions; national minorities wanted freedom. When radicals began to resort to the formation of secret societies and to revolutionary agitation, Alexander II felt constrained to adopt severe repressive measures.

Alexander II resolved to try the effect of some moderate liberal reforms in an attempt to quell the revolutionary agitation, and for this purpose he instituted a ukase for creating special commissions, composed of high officials and private personages who should prepare reforms in various branches of the administration.



During his bachelor days, Alexander made a state visit to England in 1838. Just a year older than the young Queen Victoria, Alexander took a liking to his distant cousin. The fondness however, was short-lived. While Victoria married her German cousin, Prince Albert in February 1840, Alexander became a husband the next year. On 16 April 1841 he married Princess Marie of Hesse in St Petersburg, thereafter known as Maria Alexandrovna. The Tsarevitch claimed to be deeply in love with the young Princess and vowed to marry no one else. Marie was the legal daughter of Ludwig II, Grand Duke of Hesse and by Rhine and Princess Wilhelmina of Baden, although there was a question of whether the Grand Duke or her mother's lover, Baron August von Senarclens de Grancy, was her biological father. Alexander was aware of the question of her paternity. The marriage produced six sons and two daughters:

Alexander had many mistresses during his marriage and fathered 7 known illegitimate children. These included Antoinette Bayer (20 June 1856-24 January 1948) with his mistress Wilhelmine Bayer; Michael-Bogdan Oginski (10 October 1848-25 March 1909) with mistress Countess Olga Kalinovskya (1818-1854); and Joseph Raboxicz.

On 6 July 1880, less than a month after Tsarina Maria's death on 8 June, Alexander formed a morganatic marriage with his mistress Princess Catherine Dolgorukov, with whom he already had four children. 

At the beginning of his reign, Alexander expressed the famous statement "No dreams" addressed for Poles, populating Congress Poland, Western Ukraine, Lithuania, Livonia and Belarus. The result was the January Uprising of 1863-1864 that was suppressed after eighteen months of fighting. Thousands of Poles were executed, tens of thousands were deported to Siberia. The price for suppression was Russian support for Prussian-united Germany. Twenty years later, Germany became the major enemy of Russia on the continent.

All territories of the former Poland-Lithuania were excluded from liberal policies introduced by Alexander. The martial law in Lithuania, introduced in 1863, lasted for the next 50 years. Native languages, Lithuanian, Ukrainian and Belarusian were completely banned from printed texts, see a , e.g., Ems Ukase. The Polish language was banned in both oral and written form from all provinces except Congress Kingdom, where it was allowed in private conversations only.



In 1863 Alexander II re-established the Diet of Finland and initiated several reforms increasing Finland's autonomy from Russia including establishment of own currency, the Markka. Liberation of enterprise led to increased foreign investment and industrial development. Finally, the elevation of Finnish from a language of the common people to a national language equal to Swedish opened opportunities for a larger proportion of the society. Alexander II is still regarded as "The Good Tsar" in Finland.

Alexander's attitude towards Finland could be seen as genuine belief that reforms were easier to test in a small, homogeneous country than the whole of Russia. The benevolent treatment of Finland may also be seen as a reward for the loyalty of its relatively western oriented population during the Crimean war and during the Polish uprising. Encouraging Finnish nationalism and language can also be seen as an attempt to weaken the strong ties with Sweden.

In 1866 there was an attempt on his life in Petersburg by Dmitry Karakozov. To commemorate his narrow escape from death (which he referred to only as "the event of April 4, 1866"), a number of churches and chapels were built in many Russian cities.

On the morning of 20 April 1879, Alexander II was briskly walking towards the Square of the Guards Staff and faced Alexander Soloviev, a 33 year-old former student. Having seen a menacing revolver in his hands, the Tsar fled. Soloviev fired five times but missed;and he was sentenced to death and hanged on 28 May.

The student acted on his own, but other revolutionaries were keen to murder Alexander. In December 1879, the Narodnaya Volya (People's Will), a radical revolutionary group which hoped to ignite a social revolution, organised an explosion on the railway from Livadia to Moscow, but they missed the Tsar's train. On the evening of 5 February 1880 the same revolutionaries set off a charge under the dining room of the Winter Palace, right in the resting room of the guards a story below. Being late for supper, the Tsar was unharmed, although 67 other people were killed or wounded. The dining room floor was also heavily damaged.

After the last assassination attempt, Count Loris-Melikov was appointed the head of the Supreme Executive Commission and given extraordinary powers to fight the revolutionaries. Loris-Melikov's proposals called for some form of parliamentary body, and the Emperor seemed to agree; these plans were never realized as on 13 March (1 March Old Style Date), 1881 Alexander fell victim to an assassination plot.

As he had done every Sunday for a score of years, the tsar went to the Manege to review the Life Guards of the Reserve Infantry and the Life Guards of the Sapper Battalion regiments. He travelled both to and from the Menege in a closed carriage accompanied by six Cossacks with a seventh sitting on the coachman's left. The tsar's carriage was followed by two sleighs carrying, among others, the chief of police and the chief of the tsar's guards. The route, as always, was via the Catherine Canal and over the Pevchesky Bridge.

The street was flanked by narrow sidewalks on both the right and left side. A short young man wearing a heavy black overcoat edged towards the imperial carriage making its way down the street. He was carrying a small white package wrapped in a handkerchief. The youth was Nikolai Rysakov,"After a moment's hesitation I threw the bomb. I sent it under the horses' hooves in the supposition that it would blow up under the carriage...The explosion knocked me into the fence."

The explosion, while killing one of the Cossacks and seriously wounding the driver and people on the sidewalk, several critically, had only damaged the carriage. It was bulletproof, a gift from Napoleon III of France. The tsar emerged shaken but unhurt. Rysakov was captured almost immediately. Police Chief Dvorzhitsky heard Rysakov shout out to someone in the gathering crowd. Realizing there was another (if not more than one) bomber near by he urged the tsar to leave the area at once. Alexander agreed to do so but only after he had been shown the site of the explosion. Completely surrounded by the guards and the Cossacks, the tsar made his way over to the hole in the street. It was then that a young man, Ignacy Hryniewiecki, standing by the canal fence, raised up both arms and threw something at the tsar's feet. Dvorzhitsky was later to write:

"I was deafened by the new explosion, burned, wounded and thrown to the ground. Suddenly, amid the smoke and snowy fog, I heard His Majesty's weak voice cry, 'Help!' Gathering what strength I had, I jumped up and rushed to the tsar. His Majesty was half-lying, half-sitting, leaning on his right arm. Thinking he was merely wounded heavily, I tried to lift him but the tsar's legs were shattered, and the blood poured out of them. Twenty people, with wounds of varying degree, lay on the sidewalk and on the street. Some managed to stand, others to crawl, still others tried to get out from beneath bodies that had fallen on them. Through the snow, debris, and blood you could see fragments of clothing, epaulets, sabers, and bloody chunks of human flesh."

Later it was learned there was a third bomber in the crowd. Ivan Emelyanov stood ready, clutching a briefcase containing a bomb that would be used if the other two bombs, and bombers, failed.

Alexander was carried by sleigh to the Winter Palace, up the marble staircase, a trail of blood in his wake, and in to his study where, twenty years before almost to the date, he had signed the Emancipation Edict freeing the serfs. Alexander with both legs destroyed, was bleeding to death. Members of the Romanov family came rushing to the scene. One of them was the quiet, sensitive thirteen year old boy named Nicky, elder son of the heir-apparent Alexander; the boy would grow up to be tsar in his own right, Nicholas II of Russia.

The dying tsar was given Communion and Extreme Unction. There was nothing to do now but wait. When asked how long it would be, the attending physician Dr. S.P. Borkin replied, "Up to fifteen minutes"At 3:30 that day the standard of Alexander II was lowered for the last time.

The assassination also caused a great setback for the reform movement. One of Alexander II's last ideas was to draft up plans for an elected parliament, or Duma, which were completed the day before he died but not yet released to the Russian people. The first action Alexander III took after his coronation was to tear up those plans. A Duma would not come into fruition until 1905, by Alexander II's grandson, Nicholas II, who commissioned the Duma following heavy pressure on the monarchy by the Russian Revolution of 1905.

A second consequence of the assassination was anti-Jewish pogroms and legislation. Despite the fact only one Jew was involved in the assassination conspiracy, over 200 Jews who had nothing to do with the murder of Alexander II were beaten to death in these pogroms.

A third consequence of the assassination was that suppression of civil liberties in Russia and police brutality burst back with a full force after experiencing some restraint under the reign of Alexander II. Alexander II's murder and subsequent death was witnessed firsthand by his son, Alexander III, and his grandson, Nicholas II, both future Tsars, who vowed not to have the same fate befall them. Both used the Okhrana to arrest protestors and uproot suspected rebel groups, creating further suppression of personal freedom for the Russian people.



Ancestors of Alexander II of Russia













Benjamin Franklin

Benjamin Franklin (January 17, 1706 [O.S. January 6, 1705] April 17, 1790) was one of the Founding Fathers of the United States of America. A noted polymath, Franklin was a leading author and printer, satirist, political theorist, politician, scientist, inventor, civic activist, statesman and diplomat. As a scientist he was a major figure in the Enlightenment and the history of physics for his discoveries and theories regarding electricity. He invented the lightning rod, bifocals, the Franklin stove, a carriage odometer, and a musical instrument. He formed both the first public lending library in America and first fire department in Pennsylvania. He was an early proponent of colonial unity and as a political writer and activist he, more than anyone, invented the idea of an American nation and as a diplomat during the American Revolution, he secured the French alliance that helped to make independence possible.

Franklin is credited as being foundational to the roots of American values and character, a marriage of the practical and democratic Puritan values of thrift, hard work, education, community spirit, self-governing institutions, and opposition to authoritarianism both political and religious, with the scientific and tolerant values of the Enlightenment. In the words of Henry Steele Commager, "In Franklin could be merged the virtues of Puritanism without its defects, the illumination of the Enlightenment without its heat." To Walter Isaacson, this makes Franklin, "the most accomplished American of his age and the most influential in inventing the type of society America would become."

Franklin became a newspaper editor, printer, and merchant in Philadelphia, becoming very wealthy, writing and publishing Poor Richard's Almanack and the Pennsylvania Gazette. Franklin was interested in science and technology, and gained international renown for his famous experiments. He played a major role in establishing the University of Pennsylvania and Franklin & Marshall College and was elected the first president of the American Philosophical Society. Franklin became a national hero in America when he spearheaded the effort to have Parliament repeal the unpopular Stamp Act. An accomplished diplomat, he was widely admired among the French as American minister to Paris and was a major figure in the development of positive Franco-American relations. From 1775 to 1776, Franklin was Postmaster General under the Continental Congress and from 1785 to 1788 was President of the Supreme Executive Council of Pennsylvania. Toward the end of his life, he became one of the most prominent abolitionists.

Franklin's colorful life and legacy of scientific and political achievement, and status as one of America's most influential Founding Fathers, has seen Franklin honored on coinage and money; warships; the names of many towns, counties, educational institutions, namesakes, and companies; and more than two centuries after his death, countless cultural references.

Franklin's father, Josiah Franklin, was born at Ecton, Northamptonshire, England on December 23, 1657, the son of Thomas Franklin, a blacksmith and farmer, and Jane White. His mother, Abiah Folger, was born in Nantucket, Massachusetts, on August 15, 1667, to Peter Folger, a miller and schoolteacher and his wife Mary Morrill, a former indentured servant. A descendant of the Folgers, J.A. Folger, founded Folgers Coffee in the 19th century.

Josiah Franklin had seventeen children by his two wives. His first wife was Anne Child, whom he married about 1677 in Ecton and immigrated to Boston with in 1683; they had three children before immigrating, and four after. After her death, Josiah was married to Abiah Folger on July 9, 1689 in the Old South Meeting House by Samuel Willard. Benjamin, their eighth child, was Josiah Franklin's fifteenth child and tenth and last son.

Josiah Franklin converted to the Puritanism in the 1670s. Puritanism was a Protestant movement in England to "purify" Anglicanism from elements of the Roman Catholic religion, which they considered superstitious. Three things were important to the Puritans: that each congregation would be self-governing, that ministers give sermons instead of performing rituals such as a Mass and individual Bible study so that each believer could develop a personal understanding and relationship with God. Puritanism appealed to smart, middle-class people such as Benjamin Franklin's father, who enjoyed the governance meetings, discussion, study and personal independence.

The roots of American democracy can be seen in these Puritan values of self-government, the importance of the individual and active indignation against unjust authority, which were passed on to Benjamin Franklin and other founding fathers such as John Adams. One of Josiah's core Puritan values was that personal worth is earned through hard work, which makes the industrious man the equal of kings, which Ben Franklin etched onto his father's tombstone, from his father Josiah's favorite Bible quote, from the Hebrew Bible, Proverbs 22:29: "Seest thou a man diligent in his calling, he shall stand before Kings." Hard work and equality were two Puritan values Ben Franklin preached throughout his own life (ibid, p 78) and spread widely through Poor Richard's Almanac and his autobiography.

Ben Franklin's mother, Abiah Folger, was born into a Puritan family that was among the first Pilgrims to flee to Massachusetts for religious freedom, when King Charles I of England began persecuting Protestants. They sailed for Boston in 1635. Her father was "the sort of rebel destined to transform colonial America." As clerk of the court, he was jailed for disobeying the local magistrate in defense of middle-class shopkeepers and artisans in conflict with wealthy landowners. Ben Franklin followed in his grandfather's footsteps in his battles against the wealthy Penn family that owned the Pennsylvania Colony.



Benjamin Franklin was born on Milk Street, in Boston, Massachusetts, on January 17, 1706 and baptized at Old South Meeting House. His father, Josiah Franklin, was a tallow chandler, a maker of candles and soap, whose second wife, Abiah Folger, was Benjamin's mother. Josiah's marriages produced 17 children; Benjamin was the fifteenth child and youngest son. Josiah wanted Ben to attend school with the clergy but only had enough money to send him to school for two years. He attended Boston Latin School but did not graduate; he continued his education through voracious reading. Although "his parents talked of the church as a career" for Franklin, his schooling ended when he was ten. He then worked for his father for a time and at 12 he became an apprentice to his brother James, a printer, who taught Ben the printing trade. When Ben was 15, James created the New England Courant, the first truly independent newspaper in the colonies. When denied the option to write to the paper, Franklin invented the pseudonym of "Mrs. Silence Dogood," who was ostensibly a middle-aged widow. The letters were published in the paper and became a subject of conversation around town. Neither James nor the Courant's readers were aware of the ruse, and James was unhappy with Ben when he discovered the popular correspondent was his younger brother. Franklin left his apprenticeship without permission and in so doing became a fugitive.

At age 17, Franklin ran away to Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, seeking a new start in a new city. When he first arrived he worked in several printer shops around town. However, he was not satisfied by the immediate prospects. After a few months, while working in a printing house, Franklin was convinced by Pennsylvania Governor Sir William Keith to go to London, ostensibly to acquire the equipment necessary for establishing another newspaper in Philadelphia. Finding Keith's promises of backing a newspaper to be empty, Franklin worked as a compositor in a printer's shop in what is now the Church of St Bartholomew-the-Great in the Smithfield area of London. Following this, he returned to Philadelphia in 1726 with the help of a merchant named Thomas Denham, who gave Franklin a position as clerk, shopkeeper, and bookkeeper in Denham's merchant business.

In 1727, Benjamin Franklin, 21, created the Junto, a group of "like minded aspiring artisans and tradesmen who hoped to improve themselves while they improved their community." The Junto was a discussion group for issues of the day; it subsequently gave rise to many organizations in Philadelphia.

Reading was a great pastime of the Junto, but books were rare and expensive. The members created a library, and initially pooled their own books together. This did not work, however, and Franklin initiated the idea of a subscription library, where the members pooled their monetary resources to buy books. This idea was the birth of the Library Company, with the charter of the Library Company of Philadelphia created in 1731 by Franklin. Franklin hired the first American librarian in 1732, Louis Timothee. 

Originally, the books were kept in the homes of the first librarians, but in 1739 the collection was moved to the second floor of the State House of Pennsylvania, now known as Independence Hall. In 1791, a new building was built specifically for the library. The Library Company flourished with no competition and gained many priceless collections from bibliophiles such as James Logan and his physician brother William. The Library Company is now a great scholarly and research library with 500,000 rare books, pamphlets, and broadsides, more than 160,000 manuscripts, and 75,000 graphic items.

Upon Denham's death, Franklin returned to his former trade. By 1730, Franklin had set up a printing house of his own and had contrived to become the publisher of a newspaper called The Pennsylvania Gazette. The Gazette gave Franklin a forum for agitation about a variety of local reforms and initiatives through printed essays and observations. Over time, his commentary, together with a great deal of savvy about cultivating a positive image of an industrious and intellectual young man, earned him a great deal of social respect; though even after Franklin had achieved fame as a scientist and statesman, he habitually signed his letters with the unpretentious 'B. Franklin, Printer.'

In 1731, Franklin was initiated into the local Freemason lodge, becoming a grand master in 1734, indicating his rapid rise to prominence in Pennsylvania. That same year, he edited and published the first Masonic book in the Americas, a reprint of James Anderson's Constitutions of the Free-Masons. Franklin remained a Freemason throughout the rest of his life.

In 1724, while a boarder in the Read home, Franklin had courted Deborah Read before going to London at Governor Keith's request. At that time, Miss Read's mother was wary of allowing her daughter to wed a seventeen-year old who was on his way to London. Her own husband having recently died, Mrs. Read declined Franklin's offer of marriage.

While Franklin was in London, Deborah married a man named John Rodgers. This proved to be a regrettable decision. Rodgers shortly avoided his debts and prosecution by fleeing to Barbados, leaving Deborah behind. With Rodgers' fate unknown, and bigamy illegal, Deborah was not free to remarry.

In 1730, Franklin acknowledged an illegitimate son named William, who would eventually become the last Loyalist governor of New Jersey. While the identity of William's mother remains unknown, perhaps the responsibility of an infant child gave Franklin a reason to take up residence with Deborah Read. William was raised in the Franklin household but eventually broke with his father over the treatment of the colonies at the hands of the crown. However, he was not above using his father's fame to enhance his own standing.

Franklin established a common-law marriage with Deborah Read on September 1, 1730. In addition to raising William, Benjamin and Deborah Franklin had two children together. The first, Francis Folger Franklin, born October 1732, died of smallpox in 1736. Sarah Franklin, nicknamed Sally, was born in 1743. She eventually married Richard Bache, had seven children, and cared for her father in his old age.

Deborah's fear of the sea meant that she never accompanied Franklin on any of his extended trips to Europe, despite his repeated requests. However, Franklin did not leave London to visit Deborah even after she wrote to him in November 1769 saying her illness was due to dissatisfied distress because of his prolonged absence. Deborah Read Franklin died of a stroke in 1774, while Benjamin was on an extended trip to England.

In 1733, Franklin began to publish the famous Poor Richard's Almanack (with content both original and borrowed) under the pseudonym Richard Saunders, on which much of his popular reputation is based. Franklin frequently wrote under pseudonyms. Although it was no secret that Franklin was the author, his Richard Saunders character repeatedly denied it. "Poor Richard's Proverbs," adages from this almanac, such as "A penny saved is twopence dear" (often misquoted as "A penny saved is a penny earned"), "Fish and visitors stink in three days" remain common quotations in the modern world. Wisdom in folk society meant the ability to provide an apt adage for any occasion, and Franklin's readers became well prepared. He sold about ten thousand copies per year (a circulation equivalent to nearly three million today).

In 1758, the year in which he ceased writing for the Almanack, he printed Father Abraham's Sermon, also known as The Way to Wealth. Franklin's autobiography, published after his death, has become one of the classics of the genre.



Franklin was a prodigious inventor. Among his many creations were the lightning rod, the glass harmonica, the Franklin stove, bifocal glasses, and the flexible urinary catheter. Franklin never patented his inventions; in his autobiography he wrote, "... as we enjoy great advantages from the inventions of others, we should be glad of an opportunity to serve others by any invention of ours; and this we should do freely and generously." His inventions also included social innovations, such as paying forward.

As deputy postmaster, Franklin became interested in the North Atlantic Ocean circulation patterns which carried mail ships. Franklin worked with Timothy Folger, his cousin and experienced Nantucket whaler captain, and other experienced ship captains, learning enough to chart the Gulf Stream, giving it the name by which it's still known today. It took many years for British sea captains to follow Franklin's advice on navigating the current, but once they did, they were able to gain two weeks in sailing time.

In 1743, Franklin founded the American Philosophical Society to help scientific men discuss their discoveries and theories. He began the electrical research that, along with other scientific inquiries, would occupy him for the rest of his life, in between bouts of politics and moneymaking.



In 1748, he retired from printing and went into other businesses. He created a partnership with his foreman, David Hall, which provided Franklin with half of the shop's profits for 18 years. This lucrative business arrangement provided leisure time for study, and in a few years he had made discoveries that gave him a reputation with the educated throughout Europe and especially in France.

His discoveries included his investigations of electricity. Franklin proposed that "vitreous" and "resinous" electricity were not different types of "electrical fluid" (as electricity was called then), but the same electrical fluid under different pressures. He was the first to label them as positive and negative respectively, and he was the first to discover the principle of conservation of charge. In 1750, he published a proposal for an experiment to prove that lightning is electricity by flying a kite in a storm that appeared capable of becoming a lightning storm. On May 10, 1752, Thomas-Franois Dalibard of France conducted Franklin's experiment (using a -tall iron rod instead of a kite) and extracted electrical sparks from a cloud. On June 15, Franklin may have possibly conducted his famous kite experiment in Philadelphia and also successfully extracted sparks from a cloud, although there are theories that suggest he never performed the experiment. Franklin's experiment was not written up until Joseph Priestley's 1767 History and Present Status of Electricity; the evidence shows that Franklin was insulated (not in a conducting path, since he would have been in danger of electrocution in the event of a lightning strike). (Others, such as Prof. Georg Wilhelm Richmann of Saint Petersburg, Russia, were electrocuted during the months following Franklin's experiment.) In his writings, Franklin indicates that he was aware of the dangers and offered alternative ways to demonstrate that lightning was electrical, as shown by his use of the concept of electrical ground. If Franklin did perform this experiment, he did not do it in the way that is often described, flying the kite and waiting to be struck by lightning, as it would have been fatal. Instead, he used the kite to collect some electric charge from a storm cloud, which implied that lightning was electrical.

On October 19 in a letter to England explaining directions for repeating the experiment, Franklin wrote:

"When rain has wet the kite twine so that it can conduct the electric fire freely, you will find it streams out plentifully from the key at the approach of your knuckle, and with this key a phial, or Leiden jar, maybe charged: and from electric fire thus obtained spirits may be kindled, and all other electric experiments [may be] performed which are usually done by the help of a rubber glass globe or tube; and therefore the sameness of the electrical matter with that of lightening completely demonstrated."

Franklin's electrical experiments led to his invention of the lightning rod. He noted that conductors with a sharp rather than a smooth point were capable of discharging silently, and at a far greater distance. He surmised that this knowledge could be of use in protecting buildings from lightning, by attaching "upright Rods of Iron, made sharp as a Needle and gilt to prevent Rusting, and from the Foot of those Rods a Wire down the outside of the Building into the Ground;...Would not these pointed Rods probably draw the Electrical Fire silently out of a Cloud before it came nigh enough to strike, and thereby secure us from that most sudden and terrible Mischief!" Following a series of experiments on Franklin's own house, lightning rods were installed on the Academy of Philadelphia (later the University of Pennsylvania) and the Pennsylvania State House (later Independence Hall) in 1752.

In recognition of his work with electricity, Franklin received the Royal Society's Copley Medal in 1753, and in 1756 he became one of the few eighteenth century Americans to be elected as a Fellow of the Society. The cgs unit of electric charge has been named after him: one franklin (Fr) is equal to one statcoulomb.

On October 21, 1743, according to popular myth, a storm moving from the southwest denied Franklin the opportunity of witnessing a lunar eclipse. Franklin was said to have noted that the prevailing winds were actually from the northeast, contrary to what he had expected. In correspondence with his brother, Franklin learned that the same storm had not reached Boston until after the eclipse, despite the fact that Boston is to the northeast of Philadelphia. He deduced that storms do not always travel in the direction of the prevailing wind, a concept which would have great influence in meteorology.

Franklin noted a principle of refrigeration by observing that on a very hot day, he stayed cooler in a wet shirt in a breeze than he did in a dry one. To understand this phenomenon more clearly Franklin conducted experiments. On one warm day in Cambridge, England, in 1758, Franklin and fellow scientist John Hadley experimented by continually wetting the ball of a mercury thermometer with ether and using bellows to evaporate the ether. With each subsequent evaporation, the thermometer read a lower temperature, eventually reaching 7F (-14C). Another thermometer showed the room temperature to be constant at 65F (18C). In his letter "Cooling by Evaporation," Franklin noted that "one may see the possibility of freezing a man to death on a warm summers day."

Franklin is known to have played the violin, the harp, and the guitar. He also composed music, notably a string quartet in early classical style, and invented a much-improved version of the glass harmonica, in which each glass was made to rotate on its own, with the player's fingers held steady, instead of the other way around; this version soon found its way to Europe.

In 1736, Franklin created the Union Fire Company, one of the first volunteer fire fighting companies in America. In the same year, he printed a new currency for New Jersey based on innovative anti-counterfeiting techniques which he had devised.

As he matured, Franklin began to concern himself more with public affairs. In 1743, he set forth a scheme for The Academy and College of Philadelphia. He was appointed president of the academy in November 13, 1749, and it opened on August 13, 1751. At its first commencement, on May 17, 1757, seven men graduated; six with a Bachelor of Arts and one as Master of Arts. It was later merged with the University of the State of Pennsylvania to become the University of Pennsylvania.

In 1753, both Harvard and Yale awarded him honorary degrees.

In 1751, Franklin and Dr. Thomas Bond obtained a charter from the Pennsylvania legislature to establish a hospital. Pennsylvania Hospital was the first hospital in what was to become the United States of America.



Franklin became involved in Philadelphia politics and rapidly progressed. In October 1748, he was selected as a councilman, in June 1749 he became a Justice of the Peace for Philadelphia, and in 1751 he was elected to the Pennsylvania Assembly. On August 10, 1753, Franklin was appointed joint deputy postmaster-general of North America. His most notable service in domestic politics was his reform of the postal system, but his fame as a statesman rests chiefly on his subsequent diplomatic services in connection with the relations of the colonies with Great Britain, and later with France.

In 1754, he headed the Pennsylvania delegation to the Albany Congress. This meeting of several colonies had been requested by the Board of Trade in England to improve relations with the Indians and defense against the French. Franklin proposed a broad Plan of Union for the colonies. While the plan was not adopted, elements of it found their way into the Articles of Confederation and the Constitution.

In 1756, Franklin organized the Pennsylvania Militia (see "Associated Regiment of Philadelphia" under heading of Pennsylvania's 103rd Artillery and 111th Infantry Regiment at Continental Army). He used Tun Tavern as a gathering place to recruit a regiment of soldiers to go into battle against the Native American uprisings that beset the American colonies. {Reportably Franklin was elected "Colonel" of the Associated Regiment but declined the honor}.

In 1757, he was sent to England by the Pennsylvania Assembly as a colonial agent to protest against the political influence of the Penn family, the proprietors of the colony. He remained there for five years, striving to end the proprietors' prerogative to overturn legislation from the elected Assembly, and their exemption from paying taxes on their land. His lack of influential allies in Whitehall led to the failure of this mission. In 1759, the University of St Andrews awarded him an Honorary Doctor of Laws degree. In 1762, Oxford University awarded Franklin an honorary doctorate for his scientific accomplishments and from then on he went by "Doctor Franklin." He also managed to secure a post for his illegitimate son, William Franklin, as Colonial Governor of New Jersey.

During his stay in London, Franklin became involved in radical politics. He was a member of the Club of Honest Whigs, alongside thinkers such as Richard Price.

In 1756, Franklin became a member of the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures & Commerce (now Royal Society of Arts or RSA, which had been founded in 1754), whose early meetings took place in coffee shops in London's Covent Garden district, close to Franklin's main residence in Craven Street (the only one of his residences to survive and which opened to the public as the Benjamin Franklin House museum on January 17, 2006). After his return to America, Franklin became the Society's Corresponding Member and remained closely connected with the Society. The RSA instituted a Benjamin Franklin Medal in 1956 to commemorate the 250th anniversary of Franklin's birth and the 200th anniversary of his membership of the RSA.

During his stays at Craven Street in London between 1757 and 1775, Franklin developed a close friendship with his landlady, Margaret Stevenson and her circle of friends and relations, in particular her daughter Mary, who was more often known as Polly.

In 1759, he visited Edinburgh with his son, and recalled his conversations there as "the densest happiness of my life."

He also joined the influential Birmingham based Lunar Society with whom he regularly corresponded and on occasion, visited in Birmingham in the West Midlands.



In 1763, soon after Franklin returned to Pennsylvania, the western frontier was engulfed in a bitter war known as Pontiac's Rebellion. The Paxton Boys, a group of settlers convinced that the Pennsylvania government was not doing enough to protect them from American Indian raids, murdered a group of peaceful Susquehannock Indians and then marched on Philadelphia. Franklin helped to organize the local militia in order to defend the capital against the mob, and then met with the Paxton leaders and persuaded them to disperse. Franklin wrote a scathing attack against the racial prejudice of the Paxton Boys. "If an Indian injures me," he asked, "does it follow that I may revenge that Injury on all Indians?"

At this time, many members of the Pennsylvania Assembly were feuding with William Penn's heirs, who controlled the colony as proprietors. Franklin led the "anti-proprietary party" in the struggle against the Penn family, and was elected Speaker of the Pennsylvania House in May 1764. His call for a change from proprietary to royal government was a rare political miscalculation, however: Pennsylvanians worried that such a move would endanger their political and religious freedoms. Because of these fears, and because of political attacks on his character, Franklin lost his seat in the October 1764 Assembly elections. The anti-proprietary party dispatched Franklin to England to continue the struggle against the Penn family proprietorship, but during this visit, events would drastically change the nature of his mission.

In London, Franklin opposed the 1765 Stamp Act, but when he was unable to prevent its passage, he made another political miscalculation and recommended a friend to the post of stamp distributor for Pennsylvania. Pennsylvanians were outraged, believing that he had supported the measure all along, and threatened to destroy his home in Philadelphia. Franklin soon learned of the extent of colonial resistance to the Stamp Act, and his testimony before the House of Commons led to its repeal. With this, Franklin suddenly emerged as the leading spokesman for American interests in England. He wrote popular essays on behalf of the colonies, and Georgia, New Jersey, and Massachusetts also appointed him as their agent to the Crown.



In September 1767, Franklin visited Paris with his usual traveling partner, Sir John Pringle. News of his electrical discoveries was widespread in France. His reputation meant that he was introduced to many influential scientists and politicians, and also to King Louis XV.

While living in London in 1768, he developed a phonetic alphabet in A Scheme for a new Alphabet and a Reformed Mode of Spelling. This reformed alphabet discarded six letters Franklin regarded as redundant (c, j, q, w, x and y), and substituted six new letters for sounds he felt lacked letters of their own. His new alphabet, however, never caught on and he eventually lost interest.

In 1771, Franklin traveled extensively around the British Isles staying with, among others, Joseph Priestley and David Hume. In Dublin, Franklin was invited to sit with the members of the Irish Parliament rather than in the gallery. He was the first American to be given this honor. While touring Ireland, he was moved by the level of poverty he saw. Ireland's economy was affected by the same trade regulations and laws of England which governed America. Franklin feared that America could suffer the same effects should Britains colonial exploitation continue.

In 1773, Franklin published two of his most celebrated pro-American satirical essays: , and An Edict by the King of Prussia. He also published an Abridgment of the Book of Common Prayer, anonymously with Francis Dashwood. Among the unusual features of this work is a funeral service reduced to six minutes in length, "to preserve the health and lives of the living."

Franklin obtained private letters of Massachusetts governor Thomas Hutchinson and lieutenant governor Andrew Oliver which proved they were encouraging London to crack down on the rights of the Bostonians. Franklin sent them to America where they escalated the tensions. Franklin now appeared to the British as the fomenter of serious trouble. Hopes for a peaceful solution ended as he was systematically ridiculed and humiliated by the Privy Council. He left London in March 1775.



By the time Franklin arrived in Philadelphia on May 5, the American Revolution had begun with fighting at Lexington and Concord. The New England militia had trapped the main British army in Boston. The Pennsylvania Assembly unanimously chose Franklin as their delegate to the Second Continental Congress. In June 1776, he was appointed a member of the Committee of Five that drafted the Declaration of Independence. Although he was temporarily disabled by gout and unable to attend most meetings of the Committee, Franklin made several small changes to the draft sent to him by Thomas Jefferson.

At the signing, he is quoted as having replied to a comment by Hancock that they must all hang together: "Yes, we must, indeed, all hang together, or most assuredly we shall all hang separately."

In December 1776, Franklin was dispatched to France as commissioner for the United States. He lived in a home in the Parisian suburb of Passy, donated by Jacques-Donatien Le Ray de Chaumont who supported the United States. Franklin remained in France until 1785, and was such a favorite of French society that it became fashionable for wealthy French families to decorate their parlors with a painting of him. He was highly flirtatious in the French manner (but did not have any actual affairs). He conducted the affairs of his country towards the French nation with great success, which included securing a critical military alliance in 1778 and negotiating the Treaty of Paris (1783). During his stay in France, Benjamin Franklin as a freemason was Grand Master of the Lodge Les Neuf Surs from 1779 until 1781. His number was 24 in the Lodge. He was also a Past Grand Master of Pennsylvania. In 1784, when Franz Mesmer began to publicize his theory of "animal magnetism", which was considered offensive by many, Louis XVI appointed a commission to investigate it. These included the chemist Antoine Lavoisier, the physician Joseph-Ignace Guillotin, the astronomer Jean Sylvain Bailly and Benjamin Franklin.

When he finally returned home in 1785, Franklin occupied a position only second to that of George Washington as the champion of American independence. Le Ray honored him with a commissioned portrait painted by Joseph Duplessis that now hangs in the National Portrait Gallery of the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C. After his return, Franklin became an abolitionist, freeing both of his slaves. He eventually became president of the Pennsylvania Abolition Society.

In 1787, Franklin served as a delegate to the Philadelphia Convention. He held an honorific position and seldom engaged in debate. He is the only Founding Father who is a signatory of all four of the major documents of the founding of the United States: the Declaration of Independence, the Treaty of Paris, the Treaty of Alliance with France, and the United States Constitution.

In 1787, a group of prominent ministers in Lancaster, Pennsylvania, proposed the foundation of a new college to be named in Franklin's honor. Franklin donated 200 towards the development of Franklin College, which is now called Franklin & Marshall College.

Between 1771 and 1788, he finished his autobiography. While it was at first addressed to his son, it was later completed for the benefit of mankind at the request of a friend.

In his later years, as Congress was forced to deal with the issue of slavery, Franklin wrote several essays that attempted to convince his readers of the importance of the abolition of slavery and of the integration of Africans into American society. These writings included:

In 1790, Quakers from New York and Pennsylvania presented their petition for abolition. Their argument against slavery was backed by the Pennsylvania Abolitionist Society and its president, Benjamin Franklin.

Special balloting conducted October 18, 1785 unanimously elected Franklin the sixth President of the Supreme Executive Council of Pennsylvania, replacing John Dickinson. The office of President of Pennsylvania was analogous to the modern position of Governor. It is not clear why Dickinson needed to be replaced with less than two weeks remaining before the regular election. Franklin held that office for slightly over three years, longer than any other, and served the Constitutional limit of three full terms. Shortly after his initial election he was re-elected to a full term on October 29, 1785, and again in the fall of 1786 and on October 31, 1787. Officially, his term concluded on November 5, 1788, but there is some question regarding the de facto end of his term, suggesting that the aging Franklin may not have been actively involved in the day-to-day operation of the Council toward the end of his time in office.



Like the other advocates of republicanism, Franklin emphasized that the new republic could survive only if the people were virtuous in the sense of attention to civic duty and rejection of corruption. All his life he had been exploring the role of civic and personal virtue, as expressed in Poor Richard's aphorisms.

Franklin had been baptized and educated in a Presbyterian Church based on the doctrines of John Calvin. Deborah Franklin, his wife, retained a life long association with Christ Church, Philadelphia. Franklin later in life rarely attended Sunday services but commented that "...Sunday being my studying day, I never was without some religious principles. I never doubted, for instance, the existence of the Deity; that He made the world, and governed it by His providence; that the most acceptable service of God was the doing good to man; that our souls are immortal; and that all crime will be punished, and virtue rewarded, either here or hereafter."

One of Franklin's endearing beliefs was in the respect and tolerance of all religious groups. Referring to his experience in Philadelphia, he wrote in his autobiography, "new Places of worship were continually wanted, and generally erected by voluntary Contribution, my Mite for such purpose, whatever might be the Sect, was never refused."

Although Franklin's parents had intended for him to have a career in the church, Franklin became disillusioned with organized religion after discovering Deism. "I soon became a thorough Deist." He went on to attack Christian principles of free will and morality in a 1725 pamphlet, A Dissertation on Liberty and Necessity, Pleasure and Pain. He consistently attacked religious dogma, arguing that morality was more dependent upon virtue and benevolent actions than on strict obedience to religious orthodoxy: "I think opinions should be judged by their influences and effects; and if a man holds none that tend to make him less virtuous or more vicious, it may be concluded that he holds none that are dangerous, which I hope is the case with me."

In 1790, just about a month before he died, Franklin wrote the following in a letter to Ezra Stiles, president of Yale, who had asked him his views on religion:



Like most Enlightenment intellectuals, Franklin separated virtue, morality, and faith from organized religion, although he felt that if religion in general grew weaker, morality, virtue, and society in general would also decline. Thus he wrote Thomas Paine, "If men are so wicked with religion, what would they be if without it." According to David Morgan, Franklin was a proponent of all religions. He prayed to "Powerful Goodness" and referred to God as the "INFINITE." John Adams noted that Franklin was a mirror in which people saw their own religion: "The Catholics thought him almost a Catholic. The Church of England claimed him as one of them. The Presbyterians thought him half a Presbyterian, and the Friends believed him a wet Quaker." Whatever else Benjamin Franklin was, concludes Morgan, "he was a true champion of generic religion." Ben Franklin was noted to be "the spirit of the Enlightenment."

Walter Isaacson argues that Franklin became uncomfortable with an unenhanced version of Deism and came up with his own conception of the Creator. Franklin outlined his concept of deity in 1728, in his Articles of Belief and Acts of Religion. From this, Isaacson compares Franklin's conception of deity to that of strict Deists and orthodox Christians. He concludes that unlike most pure Deists, Franklin believed that a faith in God should inform our daily actions, but that, like other Deists, his faith was devoid of sectarian dogma. Isaacson also discusses Franklin's conception that God had created beings who do interfere in wordly matters, a point that has led some commentators, most notably A. Owen Aldridge, to read Franklin as embracing some sort of polytheism, with a bevy of lesser gods overseeing various realms and planets.

On July 4, 1776, Congress appointed a committee that included Benjamin Franklin, Thomas Jefferson, and John Adams to design the Great Seal of the United States. Each member of the committee proposed a unique design: Franklin's proposal featured a design with the motto: "Rebellion to Tyrants is Obedience to God." This design was to portray a scene from the Book of Exodus, complete with Moses, the Israelites, the pillar of fire, and George III depicted as Pharaoh.

Franklin may have financially supported one particular Presbyterian group in Philadelphia. According to the epitaph Franklin wrote for himself at the age of twenty, it is clear that he believed in a physical resurrection of the body some time after death. Franklin's actual grave, however, as he specified in his final will, simply reads "Benjamin and Deborah Franklin."

Franklin sought to cultivate his character by a plan of thirteen virtues, which he developed at age 20 (in 1726) and continued to practice in some form for the rest of his life. His autobiography lists his thirteen virtues as:

Franklin didn't try to work on them all at once. Instead, he would work on one and only one each week "leaving all others to their ordinary chance". While Franklin didn't live completely by his virtues and by his own admission, he fell short of them many times, he believed the attempt made him a better man contributing greatly to his success and happiness, which is why in his Autobiography, he devoted more pages to this plan than to any other single point; in his autobiography Franklin wrote, "I hope, therefore, that some of my descendants may follow the example and reap the benefit."



Franklin died on April 17, 1790, at age 84. His funeral was attended by approximately 20,000 people. He was interred in Christ Church Burial Ground in Philadelphia. In 1728, aged 22, Franklin wrote what he hoped would be his own epitaph:

The Body of B. Franklin Printer; Like the Cover of an old Book, Its Contents torn out, And stript of its Lettering and Gilding, Lies here, Food for Worms. But the Work shall not be wholly lost: For it will, as he believ'd, appear once more, In a new & more perfect Edition, Corrected and Amended By the Author.

Franklin's actual grave, however, as he specified in his final will, simply reads "Benjamin and Deborah Franklin."

In 1773, when Franklin's work had moved from printing to science and politics, he corresponded with a French scientist on the subject of preserving the dead for later revival by more advanced scientific methods, writing:

I should prefer to an ordinary death, being immersed with a few friends in a cask of Madeira, until that time, then to be recalled to life by the solar warmth of my dear country! But in all probability, we live in a century too little advanced, and too near the infancy of science, to see such an art brought in our time to its perfection. (Extended excerpt also online.)

His death is described in the book The Life of Benjamin Franklin, quoting from the account of Dr. John Jones:

...when the pain and difficulty of breathing entirely left him, and his family were flattering themselves with the hopes of his recovery, when an imposthume, which had formed itself in his lungs, suddenly burst, and discharged a quantity of matter, which he continued to throw up while he had power; but, as that failed, the organs of respiration became gradually oppressed; a calm, lethargic state succeeded; and on the 17th instant (April, 1790), about eleven o'clock at night, he quietly expired, closing a long and useful life of eighty-four years and three months.



Franklin bequeathed 1,000 (about $4,400 at the time) each to the cities of Boston and Philadelphia, in trust to gather interest for 200 years. The trust began in 1785 when a French mathematician named Charles-Joseph Mathon de la Cour wrote a parody of Franklin's "Poor Richard's Almanack" called "Fortunate Richard." Mocking the unbearable spirit of American optimism represented by Franklin, the Frenchman wrote that Fortunate Richard left a small sum of money in his will to be used only after it had collected interest for 500 years. Franklin, who was 79 years old at the time, wrote to the Frenchman, thanking him for a great idea and telling him that he had decided to leave a bequest of 1,000 pounds each to his native Boston and his adopted Philadelphia. As of 1990, more than $2,000,000 had accumulated in Franklin's Philadelphia trust, which had loaned the money to local residents. From 1940 to 1990, the money was used mostly for mortgage loans. When the trust came due, Philadelphia decided to spend it on scholarships for local high school students. Franklin's Boston trust fund accumulated almost $5,000,000 during that same time, and was used to establish a trade school that became the Franklin Institute of Boston.

A signer of both the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution, Franklin is considered one of the Founding Fathers of the U.S. His pervasive influence in the early history of the United States has led to his being called "the only President of the United States who was never President of the United States." Franklin's likeness is ubiquitous. Since 1928, it has adorned American $100 bills, which are sometimes referred to in slang as "Benjamins" or "Franklins." From 1948 to 1964, Franklin's portrait was on the half dollar. He has appeared on a $50 bill and on several varieties of the $100 bill from 1914 and 1918. Franklin appears on the $1,000 Series EE Savings bond. The city of Philadelphia contains around 5,000 likenesses of Benjamin Franklin, about half of which are located on the University of Pennsylvania campus. Philadelphia's Benjamin Franklin Parkway (a major thoroughfare) and Benjamin Franklin Bridge (the first major bridge to connect Philadelphia with New Jersey) are named in his honor.



In 1976, as part of a bicentennial celebration, Congress dedicated a 20-foot (6 m) marble statue in Philadelphia's Franklin Institute as the Benjamin Franklin National Memorial. Many of Franklin's personal possessions are also on display at the Institute, one of the few national memorials located on private property.

In London, his house at 36 Craven Street was first marked with a blue plaque and has since been opened to the public as the Benjamin Franklin House. In 1998, workmen restoring the building dug up the remains of six children and four adults hidden below the home. The Times reported on February 11, 1998:

Initial estimates are that the bones are about 200 years old and were buried at the time Franklin was living in the house, which was his home from 1757 to 1762 and from 1764 to 1775. Most of the bones show signs of having been dissected, sawn or cut. One skull has been drilled with several holes. Paul Knapman, the Westminster Coroner, said yesterday: "I cannot totally discount the possibility of a crime. There is still a possibility that I may have to hold an inquest."

The Friends of Benjamin Franklin House (the organization responsible for the restoration) note that the bones were likely placed there by William Hewson, who lived in the house for two years and who had built a small anatomy school at the back of the house. They note that while Franklin likely knew what Hewson was doing, he probably did not participate in any dissections because he was much more of a physicist than a medical man.

"The Princess and the Patriot: Ekaterina Dashkova, Benjamin Franklin and the Age of Enlightenment" exhibition opened in Philadelphia in February 2006 and ran through December 2006. Benjamin Franklin and Dashkova met only once, in Paris in 1781. Franklin was 75 and Dashkova was 37. Franklin invited Dashkova to become the first woman to join the American Philosophical Society and the only woman to be so honored for another 80 years. Later, Dashkova reciprocated by making him the first American member of the Russian Academy of Sciences.





Franklin, in his "Poor Richard" persona, helped create popular culture in America. In turn he has been included in many different popular culture media, of which this list is a small, recent sample.

For Young Readers











Andrew Johnson

Andrew Johnson (December 29, 1808 July 31, 1875) was the seventeenth President of the United States (1865-69), succeeding to the Presidency upon the assassination of Abraham Lincoln. He was one of only two U.S. Presidents to be impeached.

At the time of the secession of the Southern states, Johnson was a U.S. Senator from Greeneville in eastern Tennessee. As a Unionist, he was the only southern Senator not to quit his post upon secession. He became the most prominent War Democrat from the South and supported the military policies of US President Abraham Lincoln during the American Civil War of 18611865. In 1862 Lincoln appointed Johnson military governor of occupied Tennessee, where he proved to be energetic and effective in fighting the rebellion and beginning transition to Reconstruction.

Johnson was nominated for the Vice President slot in 1864 on the National Union Party ticket. He and Lincoln were elected in November 1864. Johnson succeeded to the Presidency upon Lincoln's assassination on April 15, 1865.

As president he took charge of Presidential Reconstruction the first phase of Reconstruction which lasted until the Radical Republicans gained control of Congress in the 1866 elections. His conciliatory policies towards the South, his hurry to reincorporate the former Confederates back into the union, and his vetoes of civil rights bills embroiled him in a bitter dispute with some Republicans. The Radicals in the House of Representatives impeached him in 1868 while charging him with violating the Tenure of Office Act, a law enacted by Congress in March 1867 over Johnson's veto, but he was acquitted by a single vote in the Senate.

Johnson was born on December 29, 1808, in Raleigh, North Carolina, to Jacob Johnson and Mary McDonough. Andrew Johnson's father, Jacob, died when Andrew was around three years old, leaving his family in poverty. Johnson's mother then took in work spinning and weaving to support her family and later remarried. She bound Andrew as an apprentice tailor when he was 14 or 10. In the 1820s, he worked as a tailor in Laurens, South Carolina. Johnson never attended any type of school and taught himself how to read and spell.

At age 16 or 17 Johnson broke his apprenticeship and ran away with his brother to Greeneville, Tennessee, where he found work as a tailor. At the age of 18, Johnson married Eliza McCardle in 1827. Between 1828 and 1852, the couple had five children: Martha (1828), Charles (1830), Mary (1832), Robert (1834), and Andrew Jr. (1852). Eliza taught Johnson arithmetic and also tutored him to improve his literacy and writing skills.

Johnson participated in debates at the local academy at Greeneville, Tennessee and later organized a workingman's party that elected him as alderman in 1829. He served in this position until he was elected mayor in 1833. In 1835 he was elected to the Tennessee House of Representatives where, after serving a single term, he was defeated for re-election.

Johnson was attracted to Andrew Jackson's states' rights Democratic Party. He became a spokesman for the more numerous yeomen farmers and mountaineers against the wealthier, but fewer, planter elite families that had held political control both in the state and nationally. In 1839 Johnson was elected to the Tennessee Senate, where he served two consecutive two-year terms. In 1843 he became the first Democrat to win election as the U.S. Representative from Tennessee's 1st congressional district. Among his activities for the common man's interests as a member of the House of Representatives and the Senate, Johnson advocated 'a free farm for the poor' bill where farms would be given to landless farmers. Johnson was a U.S. Representative for five terms until 1853, when he was elected governor of Tennessee.

Johnson was elected governor of Tennessee, serving from 1853 to 1857. He was then elected as a Democrat to the United States Senate, serving from October 8, 1857 to March 4, 1862. He was chairman of the Committee to Audit and Control the Contingent Expense (Thirty-sixth Congress). Before Tennessee voted on secession, Johnson who lived in Unionist east Tennessee toured the state speaking in opposition to the act, which he said was unconstitutional. Johnson was an aggressive stump speaker and often responded to hecklers, even those in the Senate. At the time of secession of the Confederacy, Johnson was the only Senator from the seceded states to continue participation in Congress. His explanation for this decision was "Damn the negroes, I am fighting those traitorous aristocrats, their masters."

Lincoln appointed Johnson military governor of occupied Tennessee in March 1862 with the rank of brigadier general. During his three years in this office, he "moved resolutely to eradicate all pro-Confederate influences in the state." This "unwavering commitment to the Union" was a significant factor in his choice as vice-president by Lincoln. Johnson vigorously suppressed the Confederates and later spoke out for black suffrage, arguing, "The better class of them will go to work and sustain themselves, and that class ought to be allowed to vote, on the ground that a loyal negro is more worthy than a disloyal white man." According to tradition and local lore, on August 8, 1863, Johnson freed his personal slaves.

As a leading War Democrat and pro-Union southerner, Johnson was an ideal candidate for the Republicans in 1864 as they enlarged their base to include War Democrats. They changed the party name to the National Union Party to reflect this expansion. During the election Johnson replaced Hannibal Hamlin as Lincoln's running mate. He was elected Vice President of the United States and was inaugurated March 4, 1865. At the ceremony, Johnson, who had been drinking to offset the pain of typhoid fever (as he explained later), gave a rambling speech and appeared intoxicated to many. In early 1865, Johnson talked harshly of hanging traitors like Jefferson Davis, which endeared him to the Radicals.

On April 14, 1865, Abraham Lincoln was shot and mortally wounded by John Wilkes Booth, a Confederate sympathizer, while the President was attending a play at Ford's Theater. Booth's plan was to destroy the administration by ordering conspirators to assassinate Johnson and Secretary of State William H. Seward that same night. Seward narrowly survived his wounds, while Johnson escaped attack as his would-be assassin, George Atzerodt, failed to go through with the plan.

The morning after Lincoln's assassination, Johnson was sworn in as President of the United States on April 15, 1865 by Lincoln's newly appointed Chief Justice Salmon P. Chase. Johnson was the first Vice President to succeed to the U.S. Presidency upon the assassination of a President and the third vice president to become a president.

Johnson had an ambiguous party status. He attempted to build a party of loyalists under the National Union label, but he did not identify with the two main parties while President—though he did try for the Democratic nomination in 1868. Asked in 1868 why he did not become a Democrat, he said "It is true I am asked why don't I join the Democratic Party. Why don't they join me...if I have administered the office of president so well?"

Northern anger over the assassination of Lincoln and the immense human cost of the war led to demands for harsh policies. Vice President Andrew Johnson had taken a hard line and spoke of hanging rebel Confederates. In late April, 1865 he was noted telling an Indiana delegation that, "Treason must be made odious... traitors must be punished and impoverished ... their social power must be destroyed." However, when he succeeded Lincoln as President, Johnson took a much softer line noting, "I say, as to the leaders, punishment. I also say leniency, reconciliation and amnesty to the thousands whom they have misled and deceived." and ended up pardoning many Confederate leaders and ex-Confederates to maintain their control of Southern state governments, Southern lands, and black people.

His class-based resentment of the rich appeared in a May 1865 statement to W.H. Holden, the man he appointed governor of North Carolina: "I intend to confiscate the lands of these rich men whom I have excluded from pardon by my proclamation, and divide the proceeds thereof among the families of the wool hat boys, the Confederate soldiers, whom these men forced into battle to protect their property in slaves." In practice, Johnson was not at all harsh toward the Confederate leaders. He allowed the Southern states to hold elections in 1865, resulting in prominent ex-Confederates being elected to the U.S. Congress; however, Congress did not seat them. Congress and Johnson argued in an increasingly public way about Reconstruction and the manner in which the Southern secessionist states would be readmitted to the Union. Johnson favored a very quick restoration, similar to the plan of leniency that Lincoln advocated before his death.

Johnson-appointed governments all passed Black Codes that gave the Freedmen second class status. In response to the Black Codes and worrisome signs of Southern recalcitrance, the Radical Republicans blocked the re-admission of the ex-rebellious states to the Congress in fall 1865. Congress also renewed the Freedman's Bureau, but Johnson vetoed it. Senator Lyman Trumbull of Illinois, leader of the moderate Republicans, took affront at the Black Codes. Trumbull proposed the first Civil Rights bill.

Although strongly urged by moderates in Congress to sign the Civil Rights bill, Johnson broke decisively with them by vetoing it on March 27. His veto message objected to the measure because it conferred citizenship on the Freedmen at a time when eleven out of thirty-six States were unrepresented and attempted to fix by Federal law "a perfect equality of the white and black races in every State of the Union." Johnson said it was an invasion by Federal authority of the rights of the States; it had no warrant in the Constitution and was contrary to all precedents. It was a "stride toward centralization and the concentration of all legislative power in the national government." Johnson, in a letter to Governor Thomas C. Fletcher of Missouri, wrote, "This is a country for white men, and by God, as long as I am President, it shall be a government for white men."

The Democratic Party, proclaiming itself the party of white men, north and South, aligned with Johnson. However the Republicans in Congress overrode his veto (the Senate by the vote of 33:15, the House by 182:41) and the Civil Rights bill became law.

The last moderate proposal was the Fourteenth Amendment, also authored by moderate Trumbull. It was designed to put the key provisions of the Civil Rights Act into the Constitution, but it went much further. It extended citizenship to everyone born in the United States (except Indians on reservations), penalized states that did not give the vote to Freedmen, and most importantly, created new Federal civil rights that could be protected by Federal courts. It guaranteed the Federal war debt (and promised the Confederate debt would never be paid). Johnson used his influence to block the amendment in the states, as three-fourths of the states were required for ratification. (The Amendment was later ratified.)

The moderate effort to compromise with Johnson had failed and an all-out political war broke out between the Republicans (both Radical and moderate) on one side, and on the other Johnson and his allies in the Democratic party in the North, and the conservative groupings in the South. The decisive battle was the election of 1866. Johnson campaigned vigorously but was widely ridiculed. The Republicans won by a landslide (the Southern states were not allowed to vote), and took full control of Reconstruction. Johnson was almost powerless.

Historian James Ford Rhodes has explained Johnson's inability to engage in serious negotiations:As Senator Charles Sumner shrewdly said, "the President himself is his own worst counselor, as he is his own worst defender." Johnson acted in accordance with his nature. He had intellectual force but it worked in a groove. Obstinate rather than firm it undoubtedly seemed to him that following counsel and making concessions were a display of weakness. At all events from his December message to the veto of the Civil Rights Bill he yielded not a jot to Congress. The moderate senators and representatives (who constituted a majority of the Union party) asked him for only a slight compromise; their action was really an entreaty that he would unite with them to preserve Congress and the country from the policy of the radicals.The two projects which Johnson had most at heart were the speedy admission of the Southern senators and representatives to Congress and the relegation of the question of 'negro suffrage' to the States themselves. Himself shrinking from the imposition on these communities of the franchise for the colored people, his unyielding position in regard to matters involving no vital principle did much to bring it about. His quarrel with Congress prevented the readmission into the Union on generous terms of the members of the late Confederacy; and for the quarrel and its unhappy results Johnson's lack of imagination and his inordinate sensitiveness to political gadflies were largely responsible: it was not a contest in which fundamentals were involved.He sacrificed two important objects to petty considerations. His pride of opinion, his desire to beat, blinded him to the real welfare of the South and of the whole country.

There were two attempts to remove President Andrew Johnson from office. The first occurred in the fall of 1867. On November 21, 1867, the House Judiciary committee produced a bill of impeachment that consisted of a vast collection of complaints against him. After a furious debate, a formal vote was held in the House of Representatives on December 5, 1867, which failed 108-57.

Johnson notified Congress that he had removed Edwin Stanton as Secretary of War and was replacing him in the interim with Adjutant-General Lorenzo Thomas. Johnson had wanted to replace Stanton with former General Ulysses S. Grant, who refused to accept the position. This violated the Tenure of Office Act, a law enacted by Congress in March 1867 over Johnson's veto, specifically designed to protect Stanton. Johnson had vetoed the act, claiming it was unconstitutional. The act said, "...every person holding any civil office, to which he has been appointed by and with the advice and consent of the Senate ... shall be entitled to hold such office until a successor shall have been in like manner appointed and duly qualified," thus removing the President's previous unlimited power to remove any of his Cabinet members at will. Years later in the case Myers v. United States in 1926, the Supreme Court ruled that such laws were indeed unconstitutional.

The Senate and House entered into debate. Thomas attempted to move into the war office, for which Stanton had Thomas arrested. Three days after Stanton's removal, the House impeached Johnson for intentionally violating the Tenure of Office Act.

On March 5, 1868, a court of impeachment was constituted in the Senate to hear charges against the President. William M. Evarts served as his counsel. Eleven articles were set out in the resolution, and the trial before the Senate lasted almost three months. Johnson's defense was based on a clause in the Tenure of Office Act stating that the then-current secretaries would hold their posts throughout the term of the President who appointed them. Since Lincoln had appointed Stanton, it was claimed, the applicability of the act had already run its course.

There were three votes in the Senate: one on May 16 for the 11th article of impeachment, which included many of the charges contained in the other articles, and two on May 26 for the second and third articles, after which the trial adjourned. On all three occasions, thirty-five Senators voted "guilty" and nineteen "not guilty." As the Constitution requires a two-thirds majority for conviction in impeachment trials, Johnson was acquitted; the 35-19 vote was one less then the majority required. A single changed vote for guilty would have convicted and removed Johnson from office. Seven Republican senators were disturbed by how the proceedings had been manipulated in order to give a one-sided presentation of the evidence. Senators William Pitt Fessenden, Joseph S. Fowler, James W. Grimes, John B. Henderson, Lyman Trumbull, Peter G. Van Winkle, and Edmund G. Ross of Kansas, who provided the decisive vote, defied their party and public opinion and voted against conviction.

Before 1960 most historians held the impeachment of Andrew Johnson as a violation of American values regarding division of powers and fair play. Had Johnson been successfully removed from office, he would have been replaced with Radical Republican Benjamin Wade, making the presidency and Congress somewhat uniform in ideology, although in many ways Wade was more "radical" than the Republicans in Congress. This would have established a precedent that a President could be removed not for "high crimes and misdemeanors," but for purely political differences.

One of Johnson's last significant acts was granting unconditional amnesty to all Confederates on Christmas Day, December 25, 1868. This was after the election of U.S. Grant to succeed him, but before Grant took office in March 1869. Earlier amnesties requiring signed oaths and excluding certain classes of people were issued both by Lincoln and by Johnson.



Johnson forced the French out of Mexico by sending a combat army to the border and issuing an ultimatum. The French withdrew in 1867, and the government they supported quickly collapsed. Secretary of State Seward negotiated the purchase of Alaska from Russia on April 9, 1867 for $7.2 million. Critics sneered at "Seward's Folly" and "Seward's Icebox" and "Icebergia." Seward also negotiated to purchase the Danish West Indies, but the Senate refused to approve the purchase in 1867 (it eventually happened in 1917). The Senate likewise rejected Seward's arrangement with the United Kingdom to arbitrate the ''Alabama'' Claims.

The U.S. experienced tense relations with the United Kingdom and its colonial government in Canada in the aftermath of the war. Lingering resentment over the perception of British sympathy towards the Confederacy resulted in Johnson initially turning a blind eye towards a series of armed incursions by Irish-American civil war veterans into British territory in Canada, named the Fenian Raids. Eventually, Johnson ordered the Fenians disarmed and barred from crossing the border, but his hesitant reaction to the crisis helped motivate the movement toward Canadian Confederation.

Johnson was an unsuccessful candidate for election to the United States Senate from Tennessee in 1868 and to the House of Representatives in 1872. However, in 1874 the Tennessee legislature did elect him to the U.S. Senate. Johnson served from March 4, 1875, until his death from a stroke near Elizabethton, Tennessee, on July 31 that same year. In his first speech since returning to the Senate, which was also his last, Johnson spoke about political turmoil in Louisiana. His passion aroused a standing ovation from many of his fellow senators who had once voted to remove him from the presidency. He is the only former President to serve in the Senate.

Interment was in the Andrew Johnson National Cemetery, Greeneville, Tennessee, where he was buried with a copy of the Constitution. Andrew Johnson National Cemetery is now part of the Andrew Johnson National Historic Site.

The Dunning School of the early 20th century saw Johnson as a heroic bulwark against the corruption of the Radical Republicans who tried to remove the entire leadership class of the white South. In their view, Johnson seemed to be the legitimate heir of the sainted Abraham Lincoln.

By the 1930s a series of favorable biographies enhanced his prestige. Johnson's Republican critics of the 1860s appeared as disreputable to liberal historians as did the Republican critics of Franklin D. Roosevelt. Furthermore, a Beardian School (named after Charles Beard and typified by Howard K. Beale) argued that the Republican Party in the 1860s was a tool of corrupt business interests, and that Johnson stood for the people. Historian Eric Foner says that by 1948, historians regarded Reconstruction, "as a time of corruption and misgovernment caused by granting black men the right to vote." They rated Johnson "near great." but have later changed their minds, rating Johnson "a flat failure".

The Civil Rights movement of the 1960s brought a new perspective to the practice of history as well as to civil legislation. Historians noted African American efforts to establish public education and welfare institutions, gave muted praise for Republican efforts to extend suffrage and provide other social institutions, and excoriated Johnson for siding with the opposition to extending basic rights to former slaves.

Johnson's purchase of Alaska from the Russian Empire in 1867 is believed to be a most important foreign policy action, with the purchase proving itself vital to national security during the Cold War (mid-1940s until the early 1990s). The idea and implementation is credited to Seward as Secretary of State, but Johnson approved the plan. Gold was not discovered in Alaska until 1880, thirteen years after the purchase and five years after Johnson's death, and oil was not discovered until 1968.













Bill Clinton

William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton (born William Jefferson Blythe III, August 19, 1946) served as the forty-second President of the United States from 1993 to 2001. He was the fifteenth Democrat elected to that office. He was the third-youngest president, older only than Theodore Roosevelt and John F. Kennedy. He became president at the end of the Cold War, and as he was born in the period after World War II, is known as the first Baby Boomer president. His wife is the New York Senator, Hillary Rodham Clinton.

Clinton was described as a New Democrat and was largely known for the Third Way philosophy of governance that came to epitomize his two terms as president. His policies, on issues such as the North American Free Trade Agreement and welfare reform, have been described as "centrist." Clinton presided over the longest period of peace-time economic expansion in American history, which included a balanced budget and a reported federal surplus. Based on Congressional accounting rules, at the end of his presidency Clinton reported a surplus of $559 billion. On the heels of a failed attempt at health care reform with a Democratic Congress, Republicans won control of the House of Representatives for the first time in forty years. Two years later, he was re-elected and became the first member of the Democratic Party since Franklin D. Roosevelt to win a second term as President. Later he was impeached for obstruction of justice, but subsequently was acquitted by the U.S. Senate.

Clinton left office with an approval rating at 65%, the highest end of office rating of any President since World War II. Since then, Clinton has been involved in public speaking and humanitarian work. To promote and address international causes, such as treatment and prevention of HIV/AIDS and global warming, he created the William J. Clinton Foundation.

In 2004, he released his autobiography, My Life, and more recently has been involved in his wife Hillary's 2008 presidential campaign and in that of Barack Obama.





Bill Clinton was born "William Jefferson Blythe III" in Hope, Arkansas. His father, William Jefferson Blythe, Jr., was a traveling salesman who died in an automobile accident three months before Bill was born. Following his birth, in order to study nursing, his mother Virginia Dell Cassidy (1923-1994), traveled to New Orleans, leaving Bill in Hope with grandparents Eldridge and Edith Cassidy, who owned and operated a small grocery store. At a time when the Southern United States were racially segregated, Bill's grandparents sold goods on credit to people of all racial groups. In 1950, Bill's mother returned from nursing school and shortly thereafter married Roger Clinton, who together with his brother owned an automobile dealership in Hot Springs, Arkansas. The family moved to Hot Springs in 1950.

Although he assumed use of his stepfather's surname, it was not until Billy (as he was known then) turned fourteen that he formally adopted the surname Clinton, partially as a gesture toward his stepfather. Clinton says he remembers his stepfather as a gambler and an alcoholic who regularly abused his mother and, at times, his half-brother, Roger, Jr. Clinton intervened multiple times with the threat of violence to protect them.

In Hot Springs, Clinton attended St. John's Catholic Elementary School, Ramble Elementary School, and Hot Springs High School - where he was an active student leader, avid reader, and musician. He was in the chorus and played the tenor saxophone, winning first chair in the state band's saxophone section. He briefly considered dedicating his life to music, but as he noted in his autobiography My Life:



In 1963, two influential moments in Clinton's life contributed to his decision to become a public figure. One was his visit to the White House to meet President John F. Kennedy, as a Boys Nation senator. The other was listening to Martin Luther King's 1963 I Have a Dream speech (he memorized Dr. King's words).

With the aid of scholarships, Clinton attended the Edmund A. Walsh School of Foreign Service at Georgetown University in Washington, D.C., receiving a Bachelor of Science in Foreign Service (B.S.F.S.) degree in 1968. He spent the summer of 1967, the summer before his senior year, working as an intern for Arkansas Senator J. William Fulbright. While in college he became a brother of Alpha Phi Omega and was elected to Phi Beta Kappa. Clinton was also a member of Youth Order of DeMolay, but he never actually became a Freemason. He is a member of Kappa Kappa Psi's National Honorary Band Fraternity, Inc.

Upon graduation he won a Rhodes Scholarship to University College, Oxford where he studied Government. He developed an interest in rugby union, playing at Oxford and later for the Little Rock Rugby club in Arkansas. While at Oxford he also participated in Vietnam War protests, including organizing an October 1969 Moratorium event. In later life he admitted to smoking cannabis at the university, but claimed that he "never inhaled".

After Oxford, Clinton attended Yale Law School and obtained a Juris Doctor (J.D.) degree in 1973. While at Yale, he began dating law student Hillary Rodham who was a year ahead of him. They married in 1975 and their only child, Chelsea, was born in 1980.

During Yale, Clinton took a job with the McGovern campaign and was assigned to lead McGovern's effort in Texas. He spent considerable time in Dallas, Texas, at the McGovern campaign's local headquarters on Lemmon Avenue where he had an office. There, Clinton worked with Ron Kirk, who was later elected mayor of Dallas twice, future governor of Texas Ann Richards, and then unknown television director (and future filmmaker) Steven Spielberg.

After graduating from Yale Law School, Clinton returned to Arkansas and became a professor at the University of Arkansas. A year later, he ran for the House of Representatives in 1974. The incumbent, John Paul Hammerschmidt, defeated Clinton by a 52% to 48% margin. Without opposition in the general election, Clinton was elected Arkansas Attorney General in 1976.

Clinton was elected Governor of Arkansas in 1978, making him the youngest governor in the country at age thirty-two. He worked on educational reform and Arkansas's roads, but his term included an unpopular motor vehicle tax and citizens' anger over the escape of Cuban refugees (from the Mariel boatlift) detained in Fort Chaffee in 1980. Monroe Schwarzlose of Kingsland in Cleveland County, polled 31% of the vote against Clinton in the Democratic gubernatorial primary of 1980. Some suggested Schwarzlose's unexpected voter turnout foreshadowed Clinton's defeat in the general election that year by Republican challenger Frank D. White. As Clinton once joked, he was the youngest ex-governor in the nation's history.

Clinton joined friend's Bruce Lindsey's law firm of Wright, Lindsey and Jennings, though he spent most of the next two years working on his re-election campaign. Clinton was again elected governor and kept his job for ten years. He helped Arkansas transform its economy and significantly improve the state's educational system. He became a leading figure among the New Democrats. The New Democrats, organized within the Democratic Leadership Council (DLC) were a branch of the Democratic Party that called for welfare reform and smaller government, a policy supported by both Democrats and Republicans. He served as Chair of the National Governors Association from 1986 to 1987, bringing him to an audience beyond Arkansas.

Clinton made economic growth, job creation and educational improvement high priorities. For senior citizens, he removed the sales tax from medicine and increased the home property tax exemption. Clinton was responsible for some state educational improvement programs, notably more spending for schools, rising opportunities for gifted children, an increase in vocational education, and raising of teachers' salaries.

Clinton's Governorship answered conservative criticism, but personal and business transactions made by the Clintons during this period became the basis of the Whitewater investigation, which dogged his later presidential administration. After very extensive investigation over several years, no indictments were made against the Clintons related to the years in Arkansas.

In 1987 there was media speculation Clinton would enter the race after then-New York Governor Mario Cuomo declined to run and Democratic front-runner Gary Hart withdrew owing to revelations of marital infidelity. Clinton decided to remain as Arkansas governor. For the nomination, Clinton endorsed Massachusetts Governor Michael Dukakis. However, he gave the opening night address at the 1988 Democratic National Convention, which was nationally-televised, but it was criticized for length. Presenting himself as a moderate and a member of the New Democrat wing of the Democratic Party, he headed the moderate Democratic Leadership Council in 1990 and 1991.

Due to his youthful appearance he was often called the "Boy Governor." In the first contest, the Iowa caucus, he finished a very distant third to Iowa Senator Tom Harkin. During the campaign for the New Hampshire Primary reports of an extramarital affair with Gennifer Flowers surfaced. As Clinton fell far behind former Massachusetts Senator Paul Tsongas in the New Hampshire polls, following the Super Bowl, Clinton and his wife Hillary went on 60 Minutes to refute the charges.

Their television appearance was a calculated risk but Clinton regained several delegates. He finished second to Tsongas in the New Hampshire primary, but after trailing badly in the polls and coming within single digits of winning, the media viewed it as a victory. On election night, Clinton labeled himself "The Comeback Kid." He ended leading New Hampshire by a large percentage. However, Tsongas picked up little or no momentum from his victory.

Winning the big prizes of Florida and Texas and many of the Southern primaries gave Clinton a sizable delegate lead. However, former California Governor Jerry Brown was scoring victories and Clinton had yet to win a significant contest outside of his native South.

With no major Southern state remaining, Clinton targeted the New York primary, which contained a large number of delegates. He scored a resounding victory in New York City and won, shedding his image as a regional candidate. Having been transformed into the consensus candidate, he secured the Democratic Party nomination, finishing with a victory in Jerry Brown's home state of California.





Clinton won the 1992 presidential election (43.0% of the vote) against Republican incumbent George H. W. Bush (37.4% of the vote) and billionaire populist H. Ross Perot, who ran as an independent (18.9% of the vote) on a platform focusing on domestic issues; a significant part of Clinton's success was Bush's steep decline in public approval. Because Bush's approval ratings were in the 80% range during the Persian Gulf conflict, he was described as "unbeatable." However, when Bush compromised with Democrats in an attempt to lower Federal deficits, he reneged on his , hurting his approval rating. Clinton repeatedly condemned Bush for making a promise he failed to keep. By election time, the economy was souring and Bush saw his approval rating plummet to slightly over 40%. Finally, conservatives were previously united by anti-communism, but with the end of the Cold War, the party lacked a uniting issue. When Pat Buchanan and Pat Robertson addressed Christian themesat the Republican National Convention, with Bush criticizing Democrats for omitting God from their platform, many moderates were alienated. Clinton then pointed to his moderate, "New Democrat" record as governor of Arkansas, though some on the more liberal side of the party remained suspicious. Many Democrats who supported Ronald Reagan and Bush in previous elections switched their allegiance to Clinton.

His election ended twelve years of Republican rule of the White House, and twenty of the previous twenty four years. The election gave Democrats full control of the United States Congress. Clinton was the first president to enjoy this windfall since Jimmy Carter in the late 1970s.

However, during the campaign questions of conflict of interest regarding state business and the politically powerful Rose Law Firm, at which Hillary Rodham Clinton was a partner, arose. Clinton maintained questions were moot because all transactions with the state were deducted prior to determining Hillary's firm pay. Further concern arose when Bill Clinton announced that voters would be getting two presidents "for the price of one".





Clinton was inaugurated as the 42nd President of the United States on January 20, 1993. In his inaugural address he declared:



Shortly after taking office, Clinton signed the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993, which required large employers to allow employees to take unpaid leave for pregnancy or a serious medical condition. While this action was popular, Clinton's attempt to fulfill another campaign promise of allowing openly homosexual men and women to serve in the armed forces garnered criticism from the left (for being too tentative in promoting gay rights) and from the right (who opposed any effort to allow gays to serve). After much debate, Congress implemented the "Don't Ask, Don't Tell" policy, stating as long as homosexuals keep their sexuality secret, they may serve in the military. Some gay rights advocates criticized Clinton for not going far enough and accused him of making his campaign promise to get votes and contributions. These advocates feel Clinton should have integrated the military by executive order, noting President Harry Truman used executive order to racially desegregate the armed forces. Clinton's defenders argue an executive order might have prompted the Democratic Senate to write the exclusion of gays into law, potentially making it harder to integrate the military in the future. Later in his presidency, in 1999, Clinton said he did not think any serious person could say the way the policy was being implemented was not "out of whack."

The Clinton administration launched the first official White House website on October 21, 1994. It was followed by three more versions, resulting in the final edition launched in 2000. The White House website was part of a wider movement of the Clinton administration toward web-based communication. According to Robert Longley, "Clinton and Gore were responsible for pressing almost all federal agencies, the U.S. court system and the U.S. military onto the Internet, thus opening up America's government to more of America's citizens than ever before. On July 17, 1996, President Clinton issued Executive Order 13011 Federal Information Technology, ordering the heads of all federal agencies to fully utilize information technology to make the information of the agency easily accessible to the public."



Also in 1993, Clinton controversially supported ratification of the North American Free Trade Agreement by the U.S. Senate. Clinton, along with most of his Democratic Leadership Committee allies, strongly supported free trade measures; there remained, however, strong intra-party disagreement. Opposition chiefly came from anti-trade Republicans, protectionist Democrats and supporters of Ross Perot. The bill passed the house with 234 votes against 200 opposed (132 Republicans and 102 Democrats voting in favor, 156 Democrats, 43 Republicans, and 1 independent against). The treaty was then ratified by the Senate and signed into law by the President on January 1, 1994.

Clinton signed the Brady Bill, which imposed a five-day waiting period on handgun purchases. He also expanded the Earned Income Tax Credit, a subsidy for low income workers.

One of the most prominent items on Clinton's legislative agenda was the result of a taskforce headed by Hillary Clinton, which was a health care reform plan aimed at achieving universal coverage via a national healthcare plan. Though initially well-received in political circles, it was ultimately doomed by well-organized opposition from conservatives, the American Medical Association, and the health insurance industry. However, John F. Harris, a biographer of Clinton's, states the program failed because of a lack of co-ordination within the White House. Despite his party holding a majority in Congress, the effort to create a national healthcare system ultimately died under heavy public pressure. It was the first major legislative defeat of Clinton's administration.

Two months later, after two years of Democratic Party control, the Democrats lost control of Congress in the mid-term elections in 1994, for the first time in forty years.

Clinton signed the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 in August 1993, which passed Congress without a Republican vote. It cut taxes for fifteen million low-income families, made tax cuts available to 90% of small businesses, and raised taxes on the wealthiest 1.2% of taxpayers. Additionally, through the implementation of spending restraints, it mandated the budget be balanced over a number of years.



When several longtime employees of the White House Travel Office were fired, the White House travel office controversy began on May 19, 1993. A whistleblower's letter, written during the previous administration, triggered an FBI investigation, which revealed evidence of financial malfeasance. Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr investigated the firings and found no evidence of wrongdoing on the Clintons' part.

The White House FBI files controversy of June 1996 arose around improper access to FBI security-clearance documents. Craig Livingstone, head of the White House Office of Personnel Security, improperly requested, and received from the FBI, background report files without asking permission of the subject individuals; many of these were employees of former Republican administrations. In March 2000, Independent Counsel Robert Ray determined that there was no credible evidence of any criminal activity. Ray's report further stated "there was no substantial and credible evidence that any senior White House official was involved" in seeking the files.



The application of the federal death penalty was expanded to include crimes not resulting in death, such as running a large-scale drug enterprise, by Clintons 1994 Omnibus Crime Bill. During Clinton's re-election campaign he said, "My 1994 crime bill expanded the death penalty for drug kingpins, murderers of federal law enforcement officers, and nearly 60 additional categories of violent felons."

While campaigning for U.S. President, then-Governor Clinton returned to Arkansas to see that Ricky Ray Rector would be executed. After killing a police officer and a civilian, Rector shot himself in the head, leading to what his lawyers said was a state where he could still talk but didn't understand the concept of death. According to Arkansas state and Federal law, a seriously mentally impaired inmate cannot be executed. The courts disagreed with the claim of grave mental impairment and allowed the execution. Clinton's return to Arkansas for the execution was framed in a New York Times article as a possible political move to counter "soft on crime" accusations.

According to some sources Clinton was a death penalty opponent in his early years who switched positions. During Clinton's term, Arkansas performed its first executions since 1964 (the death penalty was re-enacted on March 23, 1973). As Governor, he oversaw four executions: one by electric chair and three by lethal injection. However, Clinton was the first President to pardon a death row inmate since the federal death penalty was reintroduced in 1988. Federal executions were resumed under his successor George W. Bush.



In the 1996 presidential election, Clinton was re-elected, receiving 49.2% of the popular vote over Republican Bob Dole (40.7% of the popular vote) and Reform candidate Ross Perot (8.4% of the popular vote), becoming the first Democrat to win presidential reelection since Franklin Roosevelt. The Republicans lost a few seats in the House and gained a few in the Senate, but overall retained control of the Congress. Clinton received 379, or over 70% of the Electoral College votes, with Dole receiving 159 electoral votes.

The media and prominent Republicans raised controversy over Clinton's relationship with a 22-year-old White House intern named Monica Lewinsky, resulting in the Lewinsky scandal, on January 21, 1998. In a lame duck session after the 1998 elections, for the belief Clinton lied about his relationship with Lewinsky in a sworn deposition in the Paula Jones lawsuit, the Republican-controlled House voted to impeach Clinton in 1998, making him the second U.S. president to be impeached after Andrew Johnson.

The House held no serious impeachment hearings before the mid-term elections. Though the mid-term elections held in November 1998 were at the 6-year point in an 8-year presidency (a time in the electoral cycle where the party holding the White House usually loses Congressional seats) the Democratic Party gained several seats. To hold impeachment proceedings, the Republican leadership called a lame duck session in December 1998.



While the House Judiciary Committee hearings were perfunctory and ended in a straight party line vote, there was lively debate on the House floor. The two charges passed in the House (largely on the basis of Republican support but with a handful of Democratic votes as well) were for perjury and obstruction of justice. The perjury charge arose from Clinton's testimony about his relationship to Monica Lewinsky during a sexual harassment lawsuit (later dismissed, appealed and settled for $850,000) brought by former Arkansas state employee Paula Jones. The obstruction charge was based on his actions during the subsequent investigation of that testimony. The Senate later voted to acquit Clinton on both charges. The Senate refused to convene to hold an impeachment trial before the end of the old term, so the trial was held over until the next Congress. Clinton was represented by Washington law firm Williams & Connolly.

The Senate concluded a twenty-one day trial on February 12, 1999, with the vote on both counts falling short of the Constitutional two-thirds majority requirement to convict and remove an office holder. The final vote was generally along party lines, with no Democrats voting guilty. Some Republicans voted not guilty for both charges. On the perjury charge, fifty five senators voted to acquit, including ten Republicans, and forty five voted to convict; on the obstruction charge the Senate voted 5050.

Clinton enacted the Digital Millennium Copyright Act on October 21, 1998. It served as the first significant amendment to the Copyright Act since 1976. The DMCA extended the protection of intellectual property to outlaw reverse engineering of digital protection. It provided a framework for sound recording copyright owners and recording artists to seek public performance royalties under statute, which proved to be a landmark achievement for the recording industry.

Three notable military events occurred during Clinton's second term. In Clinton's State of the Union Address, Clinton warned Congress of Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein's pursuit of nuclear weapons:



To weaken Saddam Hussein's grip of power, Clinton signed H.R. 4655 into law on October 31, 1998, which instituted a policy of "regime change" against Iraq, though it explicitly stated it did not speak to the use of American military forces. The administration then launched a four-day bombing campaign named Operation Desert Fox, lasting from December 16 to December 19, 1998.

The Battle of Mogadishu also occurred in Somalia in 1993. During the operation, two U.S. MH-60 Black Hawk helicopters were shot down by rocket-propelled grenade attacks to their tail rotors, trapping soldiers behind enemy lines. This resulted in an urban battle that killed 18 American soldiers, wounded 73 others, and one was taken prisoner. There were many more Somali casualties. Some of the American bodies were dragged through the streets and broadcasted on television news programs. In response, U.S. forces were withdrawn from Somalia and later conflicts were approached with less soldiers on the ground.

To stop the ethnic cleansing and genocide of Albanians by nationalist Serbians in the former Federal Republic of Yugoslavia's province of Kosovo, Clinton authorized the use of American troops in a NATO bombing campaign against Yugoslavia in 1999, named Operation Allied Force. General Wesley Clark was Supreme Allied Commander of NATO and oversaw the mission. With United Nations Security Council Resolution 1244, the bombing campaign ended on June 10, 1999. The resolution placed Kosovo under UN administration and authorized a peacekeeping force. NATO claimed to have suffered zero combat deaths, and two deaths from an Apache helicopter crash. Opinions in the popular press criticized pre-war genocide claims by the Clinton administration as greatly exaggerated. A U.N. Court ruled genocide did not take place, but recognized, "a systematic campaign of terror, including murders, rapes, arsons and severe maltreatments". The term "ethnic cleansing" was used as an alternative to "genocide" to denote not just ethnically motivated murder but also displacement, though critics charge there is no difference. Slobodan Miloevi, the President of Yugoslavia at the time, was eventually charged with the "murders of about 600 individually identified ethnic Albanians" and "crimes against humanity."

After initial successes such as the Oslo accords of the early 1990s, Clinton attempted to address the Arab-Israeli conflict. Clinton brought Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak and Palestinian Authority Chairman Yasser Arafat together at Camp David. However, the negotiations were ultimately unsuccessful. The situation broke down completely with the start of the Second Intifada.

Clinton became the first president to visit Vietnam since the end of the Vietnam Warin November 2000. Clinton remained popular with the public throughout his two terms as President, ending his presidential career with a 65% approval rating, the highest end-of-term approval rating of any President since Dwight D. Eisenhower. Clinton also oversaw a boom of the U.S. economy. Under Clinton, the United States had a projected federal budget surplus for the first time since 1969.

The Whitewater controversy was an American political controversy that began with the real estate dealings of Bill and Hillary Clinton and their associates, Jim and Susan McDougal in the Whitewater Development Corporation, a failed business venture in the 1970s and 1980s.

David Hale, the source of criminal allegations against President Bill Clinton in the Whitewater affair, claimed in November 1993 that Bill Clinton, while governor of Arkansas, pressured him to provide an illegal $300,000 loan to Susan McDougal, the partner of the Clintons in the Whitewater land deal.

A U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission investigation did result in convictions against the McDougals for their role in the Whitewater project, but the Clintons themselves were never charged, and Clinton maintains innocence in the affair.

In a separate case, Clinton was ordered to pay $25,000 in fines to Arkansas state's bar officials and his Arkansas law license was suspended for five years. The agreement came on the condition that Whitewater prosecutors would not pursue federal perjury charges against him. Clinton was suspended by the Supreme Court in October 2001, and, facing disbarment from that court, Clinton resigned from the Supreme Court bar in November.

Troopergate is the popular name of an alleged scandal involving allegations by two Arkansas state troopers that they arranged sexual liaisons for then-governor Bill Clinton. The allegations by state troopers Larry Patterson and Roger Perry were first reported by David Brock in the American Spectator in 1993. The story mentioned a woman named Paula, a reference to Paula Jones. The troopers were discovered to have been paid for their stories and Brock later admitted journalistic dishonesty and apologized.

Clinton issued 141 pardons and 36 commutations on his last day in office on January 20, 2001. Most of the controversy surrounded Marc Rich and allegations that Hillary Clinton's brother, Hugh Rodham, accepted payments in return for influencing the president's decision-making regarding the pardons. Some of Clinton's pardons remain a point of controversy.

The 1996 United States campaign finance controversy was an alleged effort by the People's Republic of China (PRC) to influence the domestic policies of the United States, prior to and during the Clinton administration and also involved the fundraising practices of the administration itself.



Major legislation signed



Major legislation vetoed

Proposals not passed by Congress

Initiatives



Clinton appointed the following justices to the Supreme Court:



Clinton's job approval rating ranged from 36% in mid-1993 to 64% in late-1993 and early-1994. In his second term, his rating was consistently ranged from the high-50s to the high-60s. After his impeachment proceedings in 1998 and 1999, Clinton's rating reached its highest point at 73% approval. He finished with an approval rating of 68%, which was higher than that of any other departing president since polling began more than seventy years earlier.

As he was leaving office, a CNN/USA TODAY/Gallup poll revealed only 45% said they'd miss him. While 55% thought he "would have something worthwhile to contribute and should remain active in public life", 68% thought he'd be remembered for his "involvement in personal scandal", and 58% answered "No" to the question "Do you generally think Bill Clinton is honest and trustworthy?". 47% of the respondents identified themselves as being Clinton supporters. 47% said he would be remembered as either "outstanding" or "above average" as a president while 22% said he would be remembered as "below average" or "poor".

The Gallup Organization published a poll in February 2007 asking respondents to name the greatest president in U.S. history; Clinton came in fourth place, capturing 13% of the vote. In a 2006 Quinnipiac University poll asking respondents to name the best president since World War II, Clinton ranked 3% behind Ronald Reagan to place second with 25% of the vote. However, in the same poll, when respondents were asked to name the worst president since World War II, Clinton placed 1% behind Nixon and 18% behind George W. Bush to come in third with 16% of the vote.

In May 2006, a CNN poll comparing Clinton's job performance with that of his successor, George W. Bush, found that a strong majority of respondents said Clinton outperformed Bush in six different areas questioned. ABC News characterized public consensus on Clinton as, "You can't trust him, he's got weak morals and ethics and he's done a heck of a good job." Clinton's 65% Gallup Poll approval rating was also the highest Gallup approval rating of any President leaving office.



As the first Baby Boomer president, Clinton was the first president in a half-century not to have been shaped by World War II. Authors Martin Walker and Bob Woodward state Clinton's innovative use of soundbite-ready dialogue, personal charisma, and public perception-oriented campaigning was major for his high public approval ratings. When Clinton played the saxophone on The Arsenio Hall Show, Clinton was sometimes described by religious conservatives as "the MTV president."

Clinton was very popular among African Americans and made improving race relations a major theme of his presidency. In 1998, Nobel Prize-winning author Toni Morrison called Clinton "the first Black president," saying, "Clinton displays almost every trope of blackness: single-parent household, born poor, working-class, saxophone-playing, McDonald's-and-junk-food-loving boy from Arkansas," and comparing Clinton's sex life, scrutinized despite his career accomplishments, to the stereotyping and double standards that blacks typically endure. In 2008, after having endorsed the candidacy of Barack Obama, Morrison distanced herself from her 1998 remark about Clinton, saying that it was misunderstood. She noted that she has "no idea what his real instincts are, in terms of race" and claimed she was only describing the way he was being treated during the impeachment trial as an equivalent to a poor black person living in the ghetto.

Standing over 6'2" tall (1.88 m), Clinton was one of the tallest U.S. Presidents in the nation's history.

Throughout his career, Clinton has been subject to various allegations of sexual misconduct, though only his relationship with Lewinsky has been proven. Clinton categorically denies any inappropriate sexual conduct in all cases except the latter, though the Lewinsky affair and other allegations have become fodder for satirists, comedians, and parody in popular media.

For alleged misconduct during his governorship Paula Jones brought a sexual harassment lawsuit against Clinton while he was president. However, Jones did not have any clear evidence to support her allegations. On April 2, 1998, Jones' lawsuit was dismissed. After which, Jones tried to file for an appeal In May of 1998, Jones refiled her lawsuit with the US Court of Appeals and alleged Clinton both sexual harassed her and defamed her character. During the depositions for this lawsuit, Clinton denied having sexual relations with Monica Lewinsky a denial that became the basis for the impeachment charge of perjury. On November 18, 1998, Clinton agreed to an out-of-court settlement, and agreed to pay Jones and her attorneys a sum of $850,000.00. Clinton, however, still offered no apology to Jones and still denied ever engaging in an a sexual affair with her.

In 1998, Kathleen Willey alleged Clinton sexually assaulted her four years previously. In 1998, Juanita Broaddrick alleged she was raped by Clinton some twenty years previously. The claims by Willey and Broaddrick were never brought before a court. The independent counsel determined Willey gave "false information" to the FBI and inconsistent sworn testimony related to the Jones allegation. Broaddrick's only sworn testimony about Clinton was a previous denial of any harassment by Clinton. Gennifer Flowers, Elizabeth Ward Gracen, Sally Perdue and Dolly Kyle Browning claimed to have had adulterous sexual relations with Clinton during or before his service as governor. Garcen, however, later confessed that she lied and apologized for her actions.

Dolly Kyle Browning alleged that she and Clinton engaged in a long sexual affair between the years of 1959 and 1992. In 1998, like Paula Jones had previously done, Browning sued Clinton for sexual harassment, but her lawsuit was eventually dismissed. In April 2002, Browning tried to file for an appeal, but the US Court of Appeals would deny her appeal.



Clinton comments on contemporary politics in speaking engagements around the world. One notable theme is his advocacy of multilateral solutions to world problems. Clinton's opened his personal office in the Harlem section of New York City.

After the Clintons moved to Chappaqua, New York, in the northern suburbs of New York City, at the end of his Presidency, he assisted his wife, Hillary Clinton, in her campaign for office as Senator from New York. Clinton campaigned for a number of Democratic candidates for the Senate in the 2002 elections.

Clinton spoke for the fifth consecutive time at the Democratic National Convention on July 26, 2004, praising candidate John Kerry. He said of President George W. Bush's depiction of Kerry, "strength and wisdom are not opposing values." Despite Clinton's speech, the post-convention bounce to Kerry's poll numbers was less than was hoped for.

Mostly to corporations and philanthropic groups in North America and Europe, Clinton has given dozens of paid speeches each year, earning $100,000 to $300,000 per speech. According to his wifes Senate ethics reports, he earned more than $30 million in speaking from 2001 to 2005. In 2007, it is estimated he amassed around $40 million from speaking.

Clinton made his first visit to new United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon in April 2007. The 45-minute meeting, called at Clinton's request, touched on a host of topics, including disease, war, famine and poverty in Africa, especially in the Darfur region. The Middle East, the conflict in Iraq, and Iran's nuclear standoff with the U.N. were on the agenda, as well as HIV/AIDS.

He was the opening speaker at the Ontario Economic Summit held on November 13, 2007 in which he addressed people on various subjects including Canada's role in Afghanistan, environmentalism and access to healthcare.

Clinton served as one of the organizers for the New Baptist Covenant alongside former President Jimmy Carter and other Baptist leaders. This effort sought to bring various Baptists in America together, especially across racial lines, to discuss issues that unite them. Clinton spoke at the January 2008 celebration in Atlanta, GA.

Clinton dedicated his presidential library, the William J. Clinton Presidential Center in Little Rock, Arkansas on November 18, 2004. Under rainy skies, Clinton received praise from former presidents Jimmy Carter and George H. W. Bush, as well as from president George W. Bush. He was treated to a musical rendition from Bono and The Edge from U2, who expressed their gratitude at Clinton's efforts to resolve the Northern Ireland conflict during his presidency. The Clinton facility received a $10 million dollar donation from the royal family of Saudi Arabia. The library has the largest archives of any presidential library.

Clinton released a personal autobiography, My Life in 2004. The book was published by the Knopf Publishing Group at Random House on June 22, 2004. According to the publisher, for single day non-fiction book sales, the book set a worldwide record. Later released as an audio book, total sales were in excess of 400,000 copies. As a writer's fee, he received U.S. $12 million in advance.

He released,  in September 2007, which became a bestseller and gandered positive reviews. The book is about citizen activism and the role of public charity and public service in the modern world. The audiobook version was nominated for a 2008 Grammy Award in the category of Best Spoken Word Album.

The William J. Clinton Foundation promotes and provides for a number of humanitarian causes. Within the foundation, the Clinton Foundation HIV and AIDS Initiative (CHAI) strives to make treatment for HIV/AIDS more affordable and to implement large-scale integrated care, treatment, and prevention programs. While in Sydney to attend a Global Business Forum, Clinton signed a memorandum of understanding on behalf of his presidential foundation with the Australian government to promote HIV/AIDS programs in the Asia-Pacific region.

The Clinton Global Initiative (CGI), funded by the Clinton Foundation, was inaugurated September September 15-17 2005 in New York City to coincide with the 2005 World Summit. The focus areas of the initiative include attempts to address world problems such as global public health, poverty alleviation and religious and ethnic conflict.

Clinton announced through the William J. Clinton Foundation an agreement by major soft drink manufacturers to stop selling sugared sodas and juice drinks, in public primary and secondary schools within the United States,on May 3, 2005.

In the aftermath of the Asian tsunami and Hurricane Katrina, Clinton established, with fellow former-President George H. W. Bush, the Bush-Clinton Katrina Fund and Bush-Clinton Tsunami Fund, for which they were awarded the 2006 Philadelphia Liberty Medal on October 5, 2006. They spoke together at the funeral of Boris Yeltsin.

President George W. Bush, to help the victims of the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake, named Clinton and George H. W. Bush to lead a nationwide campaign on January 3, 2005. U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan selected Clinton to head the United Nations earthquake and tsunami relief and reconstruction effort on February 1, 2005.

Five days later, to raise money for relief through the USA Freedom Corps, Clinton and Bush appeared on the Fox Super Bowl XXXIX pre-game show. Thirteen days later, to see the relief efforts, they traveled to the affected areas.

Following the devastation of the Gulf Coast by Hurricane Katrina, Clinton worked with George H. W. Bush to coordinate private relief donations on August 31, 2005, similar to their Indian Ocean tsunami campaign.



To create the Clinton Foundation Climate Change Initiative (CCI), the William J. Clinton Foundation entered into a partnership with the Large Cities Climate Leadership Group on August 1, 2006, agreeing to provide resources to allow the participating cities to enter into an energy-saving product purchasing consortium and to provide technical and communications support.

Clinton criticized the Bush administration for its handling of emissions control while speaking at the United Nations Climate Change Conference in Montreal on December 9, 2005. To promote initiatives concerning the environment, Clinton twice visited the University of California, Los Angeles in 2006. First, to advertise the Large Cities Climate Leadership Group, he met with Tony Blair, Ken Livingstone, Antonio Villaraigosa, and Gavin Newsom on August 1, 2006. On October 13, 2006, he spoke in favor of California Proposition 87 on alternative energy, which was voted down.

Clinton had an episode of angina and was evaluated at Northern Westchester Hospital on September 2, 2004. It was determined he did not suffer a coronary infarction, and he was sent home, returning the following day for angiography, which disclosed multiple vessel coronary artery disease. He was transferred to Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center in New York City, where he underwent a successful quadruple coronary artery bypass surgery on September 6, 2004. The medical team stated, had he not had surgery, he would have likely suffered a massive heart attack within a few months. As a result of his open-heart surgery, he underwent a follow-up surgery to remove scar tissue and fluid from his left chest cavity on March 10, 2005. He has since recovered.

In the course of the 2008 Democratic presidential primary campaign, Clinton vigorously advocated on behalf of his wife, Hillary Clinton, leading some observers and party members to question the appropriateness of his role in view of his status as a former president. Some felt that Clinton was overshadowing his wife in the campaign, with her presidential rival Barack Obama complaining that he sometimes "did not know which Clinton he was running against." At a MSNBC debate, Republican primary candidate Mitt Romney said that he "can't imagine Bill Clinton left with nothing to do in the White House", suggesting that Clinton would be a "co-president and try and help manage the economy and help manage the world affairs".

Top Democratic Party officials, including Rep. Rahm Emmanuel, chairman of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee and a declared Clinton supporter, asked Clinton to tone down his attacks on Obama following the bitterly contested Nevada caucus, suggesting that Clinton could be damaging his own political capital and global stature. Some commentators even accused the former president of "playing the race card" against Obama, who is half-black, by suggesting he would understand if South Carolina's African Americans naturally would vote for the black candidate, but rejected suggestions that America was not ready for a black President. Many felt that by alienating black voters who had once overwhelmingly supported the Clintons, Clinton had tarnished his legacy as the so-called "first black president." In particular, Rep. James Clyburn (D-SC) suggested that Clinton's vocal attacks on Obama could damage the former President's legacy.Following his wife's disappointing defeat in South Carolina, Clinton again made headlines when he appeared to undermine and racialize Obama's victory by comparing it to Jesse Jackson's failed 1984 bid for the Presidency. Some observers suggested that the controversial comments fueled Sen. Ted Kennedy's decision to endorse Sen. Obama for the Presidency. Clinton attracted further controversy with a series of attacks against Obama that many independents and former Clinton supporters felt to be unfair. While some believed the attacks might eventually pay off, others felt they would damage Hillary Clinton's presidential prospects and alienate Democratic voters in the general election. Former President Bill Clinton defended his role in the Hillary Clinton presidential campaign, 2008 in South Carolina, disputing claims he made race a campaign issue. According to some reports, the accusations of racism hurt him personally, as blacks had long been Clinton's most loyal supporters.

During the primary campaign, his wife's aides criticized Clintons freelancing and deemed his office uncooperative at one point, they complained, his people would not allow one of her people to ride on his plane to campaign stops. His aides, on the other hand, stewed over what they saw as her peoples disregard for the advice of one of this generations great political minds and bristled at surrendering control of his schedule. On the night of the Pennsylvania primary, Clinton grew playfully competitive with his wife over who had done more events or had had more impact. Governor Ed Rendell showed Clinton the county-by-county returns, while she was superstitious and rarely watched election night coverage. According to Rendell, The president wanted to know exactly what the returns were in the places he had been and Hillary hadnt been. He kept showing Hillary, and she would laugh.

Due to Clinton's prominent role in his wife's presidential run and his criticism of Obama, many perceived an enduring distance between the two. Clinton was asked later if he thought presidential nominee Barack Obama was qualified to be president. He replied that the Constitution sets qualifications. When pressed as to whether Obama was "ready" to be president, Clinton replied, "You could argue that no one is ready to be president." Such remarks lead to apprehension that the party would be split to the detriment of Obama's election. Fears were allayed August 27, 2008 when Clinton enthusiastically endorsed Obama at the 2008 Democratic National Convention, saying that all his experience as president assures him that Obama is "ready to lead".

The President of the Czech Republic awarded Clinton the Order of the White Lion, First Class with Collar Chain in 1998.



From a poll conducted of the American people in December 1999, Clinton was among eighteen included in Gallup's List of Widely Admired People of the 20th century.

Clinton received the 2000 International Charlemagne Prize of the city of Aachen (a prestigious European prize), 2004 Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album for Children for narrating the Russian National Orchestra's album Wolf Tracks and Peter and the Wolf (along with Mikhail Gorbachev and Sophia Loren) and 2005 Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album for My Life, 2005 J. William Fulbright Prize for International Understanding, and 2007 TED Prize (named for the confluence of technology, entertainment and design). On October 17, 2002, Clinton became the first white person to be inducted into the Arkansas Black Hall of Fame.

He received an honorary doctorate of laws from Tulane University in New Orleans (along with George H. W. Bush), and also from the University of Michigan. He is the recipient of an honorary doctorate of humane letters from Pace University's Lubin School of Business, from Rochester Institute of Technology, and from Knox College.

On November 22, 2004, New York Republican Governor George Pataki named Clinton and the other living former presidents (Gerald Ford, Jimmy Carter, and George H. W. Bush) as honorary members of the board rebuilding the World Trade Center. In 2005, the University of Arkansas System opened the Clinton School of Public Service on the grounds of the Clinton Presidential Center.

On December 3, 2006, Clinton was made an honorary chief and Grand Companion of the Order of Logohu by Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea Michael Somare. Clinton was awarded the honor for his "outstanding leadership for the good of mankind during two terms as U.S. president" and his commitment to the global fight against HIV/AIDS and other health challenges in developing countries.

On June 2, 2007, Clinton, along with former president George H.W. Bush, received the International Freedom Conductor Award, for their help with the fund raising following the tsunami that devastated South Asia in 2004. On June 13, 2007, Clinton was honored by the Global Business Coalition on HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria alongside eight multinational-companies—HBO, Chevron Corporation, Standard Chartered plc, Eli Lilly & Company, Eskom Holdings Ltd, Marathon Oil Corporation, Coca-Cola, and Abbott—for his work to defeat HIV/AIDS.

In Europe, Bill Clinton remains popular, especially in a large part of the Balkans and in Ireland. In Pritina, Kosovo, a five-story picture of the former president was permanently engraved into the side of the tallest building in the province as a token of gratitude for Clinton's support during the crisis in Kosovo. A statue of Clinton was also built and a road was named Clinton Boulevard.

On May 1, 1988, Bill Clinton was inducted into the DeMolay International Hall of Fame.

On September 9, 2008, Bill Clinton was named as the next chairman of the National Constitution Center in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. His term will begin January 1, 2009, he will succeed Fmr. President George H. W. Bush.













Elizabeth Garrett Anderson

Dr. Elizabeth Garrett Anderson, LSA, MD (June 9 1836 – December 17 1917), was an English physician and feminist, the first woman to gain a medical qualification in Britain.

Garrett was the daughter of Newson Garrett, of Aldeburgh, Suffolk, where she was born in 1836, and the sister of Millicent Fawcett. She was also the cousin of Elizabeth Dunnell who married Richard Garrett III the famous owner of Richard Garrett & Sons. Elizabeth was educated at home and at a private school. In 1860 she resolved to study medicine, an almost unheard-of thing for a woman at that time, and regarded by some as almost indecent. Having obtained some more or less irregular instruction at the Middlesex Hospital, London, she was refused admission as a full student both there and at many other medical schools to which she applied. Finally she studied anatomy privately at the London Hospital, and with some of the professors at the University of St Andrews, and at the Edinburgh Extra-Mural school. She had no less difficulty in gaining a qualifying diploma to practise medicine. London University, the Royal Colleges of Physicians and Surgeons, and many other examining bodies refused to admit her to their examinations; but in the end the Society of Apothecaries allowed her to enter for the Licence of Apothecaries' Hall, which she obtained in 1865. This entitled her to have her name entered on the medical register, the second woman after Elizabeth Blackwell, and the first woman qualified in Britain to do so.

In 1866 she was appointed general medical attendant to St Mary's Dispensary, a London institution started to enable poor women to obtain medical help from qualified practitioners of their own sex. The dispensary soon developed into the New Hospital for Women, and there Dr Garrett worked for over twenty years. In 1870 she obtained the University of Paris degree of MD, three months after Frances Hoggan obtained that qualification. The same year she was elected to the first London School Board, at the head of the poll for Marylebone, and was also made one of the visiting physicians of the East London Hospital for Children; but the duties of these two positions she found to be incompatible with her principal work, and she soon resigned them. She also built a medical school for woman.

In 1871 she married James George Skelton Anderson (d. 1907) of the Orient Steamship Company co-owned by his uncle Arthur Anderson, but she did not give up her practice. She had three children, Louisa, Margaret who died of meningitis, and Alan. Louisa also became a pioneering doctor of medicine and social campaigner. 

In 1873 she gained membership of the British Medical Association and remained the only woman member for 19 years, due to the Association's vote against the admission of further women "one of several instances where Garrett, uniquely, was able to enter a hitherto all male medical institution which subsequently moved formally to exclude any women who might seek to follow her."

Elizabeth worked steadily at the development of the New Hospital for Women, and (from 1874) at the creation of the London School of Medicine for Women. Both institutions have since been handsomely and suitably housed and equipped, the New hospital for Women (in the Euston Road) for many years being worked entirely by medical women, and the schools (in Hunter Street, WC1) having over 200 students, most of them preparing for the medical degree of London University (the present-day University College London), which was opened to women in 1877. In 1897 Dr Garrett Anderson was elected president of the East Anglian branch of the British Medical Association. 

On 9 November 1908 she was elected mayor of Aldeburgh, the first female mayor in England. 

The movement for the admission of women to the medical profession, of which Dr Anderson was the indefatigable pioneer in England, extended in her lifetime to all of North America and Europe, except for Spain and Turkey. She died in 1917 and is buried in Aldeburgh.

Notes:









Arthur Miller

Arthur Asher Miller (October 17, 1915 – February 10, 2005) was an American playwright and essayist. He was a prominent figure in American literature and cinema for over 61 years, writing a wide variety of plays, including celebrated plays such as The Crucible, A View from the Bridge, All My Sons, and Death of a Salesman, which are still studied and performed worldwide.Miller was often in the public eye, most famously for refusing to give evidence against others to the House Un-American Activities Committee, being the recipient of the Pulitzer Prize for Drama among countless other awards, and for his marriage to Marilyn Monroe. Miller is considered by audiences and scholars as one of America's greatest playwrights, and his plays are lauded throughout the world.

Arthur Asher Miller was born to moderately affluent Jewish-American parents, Isidore and Augusta Miller, in Manhattan, New York City, in 1915. His father owned a women's clothes/coat-manufacturing business, which failed in the Wall Street Crash of 1929 after which his family moved to humbler quarters in Brooklyn.

Because of the effects of the Great Depression on his family, Miller had little money for college after graduating in 1932 from Abraham Lincoln High School (New York). Before securing a place at the University of Michigan, he worked in a number of menial jobs to pay for his tuition. He continued working in Ann Arbor to supplement his income.

At the University of Michigan, Miller first majored in journalism, where he became the reporter and night editor on the student paper, the Michigan Daily. It was during this time that he wrote his first work, No Villain. Miller switched his major to English, and subsequently won the Avery Hopwood Award for No Villain. He was mentored by Professor Kenneth Rowe, who instructed him in his early forays into playwrighting. Miller retained strong ties to his alma mater throughout the rest of his life, establishing the university's Arthur Miller Award in 1985 and Arthur Miller Award for Dramatic Writing in 1999, and lending his name to the Arthur Miller Theatre in 2000. In 1937, Miller wrote Honors at Dawn, which also received the Avery Hopwood Award.

In 1938, Miller received his bachelor's degree in English. After graduation, he joined the Federal Theater Project, a New Deal agency established to provide jobs in the theater. He chose the theater project although he had an offer to work as a scriptwriter for 20th Century Fox. However, Congress worried about possible Communist infiltration, closed the project. Miller began working in the Brooklyn Navy Yard while continuing to write radio plays, some of which were broadcast on CBS. 

On August 5, 1940, he married his college sweetheart, Mary Slattery, the Catholic daughter of an insurance salesman. The couple had two children, Jane and Robert. Robert became a director, writer and producer who was, among other things, producer of the 1996 movie version of The Crucible. 

Miller was exempted from military service during World War II because of a high-school american football injury to his left kneecap.

Early career'''In 1944 Miller wrote The Man Who Had All the Luck, which was produced in New York and won the Theater Guild's National Award.

In 1948 Miller built a small studio in Roxbury, Connecticut, a town that was to be his long time home. There, in less than a day, he wrote Act I of Death of a Salesman. Within six weeks, he completed the rest of the play, one of the works for which he is best known. Death of a Salesman premiered on Broadway on February 10, 1949 at the Morosco Theatre, directed by Kazan, and starring Lee J. Cobb as Willy Loman, Mildred Dunnock as Linda, Arthur Kennedy as Biff, and Cameron Mitchell as Happy. The play was commercially successful and critically acclaimed, winning a Tony Award for best play, the New York City Drama Circle Critics Award, and the Pulitzer Prize for Drama. It was the first play to win all three of these major awards. The searing drama ran for 742 performances. 

In 1952, Elia Kazan appeared before the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) and, under fear of being blacklisted from Hollywood, named eight black men from the Group Theatre who in recent years had been fellow members of the Communist Party. After speaking with Kazan about his testimony Miller traveled to Salem, Massachusetts to research the witch trials of 1692. The Crucible, an allegorical play in which Miller likened the situation with the House Un-American Activities Committee to the witch hunt in Salem, opened at the Beck Theatre on Broadway on January 22, 1953. Though widely considered only somewhat successful at the time of its initial release, today The Crucible is Miller's most frequently produced work throughout the world. Miller and Kazan had been close friends throughout the late 1940s and early 1950s, but after Kazan's testimony to HUAC, the pair's friendship ended, and they did not speak to each other for the next ten years. HUAC took an interest in Miller himself not long after The Crucible opened, denying him a passport to attend the play's London opening in 1954. Kazan defended his own actions through his film On the Waterfront, in which a dockworker heroically testifies against a corrupt union boss. Miller was in turn to respond with the play A View from the Bridge, in which another dockworker's decision to inform on two illegal immigrants is based on ignoble, self-serving motives. Miller did have his case overturned and his passport returned. His feelings about HUAC never changed.

Miller's experience with HUAC affected him throughout his life. In the late 1970s he became very interested in the highly publicized Barbara Gibbons murder case, in which Gibbons' son Peter Reilly was convicted of his mother's murder based on what many felt was a coerced confession and little other evidence. City Confidential, an A&E program about the murder, postulates that part of the reason Miller took such an active interest (including supporting Reilly's defense and using his own celebrity to bring attention to Reilly's plight) was because he had felt similarly persecuted in his run-in with the HUAC. He sympathized with Reilly, whom he firmly believed to be innocent and to have been railroaded by the Connecticut State Police and the Attorney General who had initially prosecuted the case. 

In 1955 a one-act version of Miller's verse drama, A View From The Bridge, opened on Broadway in a joint bill with one of Miller's lesser-known plays, A Memory of Two Mondays. The following year, Miller returned to A View from the Bridge, revising it into a two-act prose version, which Peter Brook produced in London.'''

In June 1956 Miller divorced Mary Slattery, and on June 29, he married Marilyn Monroe. Miller and Monroe had first met in 1951, when they had a brief affair, and had remained in contact since then. 

Taking advantage of the publicity of Miller's marriage, HUAC subpoenaed him to appear before the committee shortly before the nuptials. Before appearing, Miller asked the committee not to ask him to name names, to which the chairman agreed.When Miller attended the hearing, to which Monroe accompanied him, risking her own career, he gave the committee a detailed account of his political activities. Reneging on the chairman's promise, the committee asked him to reveal to the names of friends and colleagues who had partaken in similar activities. Miller refused to comply with the request, saying "I could not use the name of another person and bring trouble on him."As a result a judge found Miller guilty of contempt of Congress in May 1957. Miller was fined $500, sentenced to thirty days in prison, blacklisted, and disallowed a U.S. passport. In 1958 his conviction was overturned by the court of appeals, which ruled that Miller had been misled by the chairman of HUAC.

After his conviction was overturned, Miller began work on The Misfits, which starred his wife. Miller said that the filming was one of the lowest points in his life, and shortly before the film's premiere in 1961, the pair divorced. Nineteen months later, Monroe died of an apparent drug overdose.

Miller married photographer Inge Morath on February 17, 1962, and the first of their two children, Rebecca, was born that September. Their son Daniel was born with Down Syndrome in November, 1966, and was consequently institutionalized and excluded from the Millers' personal life at Miller's insistence. The couple remained together until Inge's death in 2002. Arthur Miller's son-in-law, actor Daniel Day-Lewis is said to have visited Daniel frequently, and to have persuaded Arthur Miller to reunite with his adult son .

In 1964 Miller's next play was produced. After the Fall is a deeply personal view of Miller's own experiences during his marriage to Monroe. The play reunited Miller with his former friend Kazan: they collaborated on both the script and the direction. After the Fall opened on January 23, 1964 at the ANTA Theatre in Washington Square Park amid a flurry of publicity and outrage at putting a Monroe-like character, called Maggie, on stage. Also in the same year, Miller produced Incident at Vichy.In 1965, Miller was elected the first American president of International PEN, a position which he held for four years. During this period Miller wrote the penetrating family drama, The Price, produced in 1968. It was Miller's most successful play since Death of a Salesman.

In 1969, Miller's works were banned in the Soviet Union after he campaigned for the freedom of dissident writers. Throughout the 1970s, Miller spent much of his time experimenting with the theatre, producing one-act plays such as Fame and The Reason Why, and traveling with his wife, producing In The Country and Chinese Encounters with her. Both his 1972 comedy The Creation of the World and Other Business and its musical adaptation, Up from Paradise, were critical and commercial failures.

In 1983, Miller traveled to the People's Republic of China to produce and direct Death of a Salesman at the People's Art Theatre in Beijing. The play was a success in China and in 1984, Salesman in Beijing, a book about Miller's experience in Beijing, was published. Around the same time, Death of a Salesman was made into a TV movie starring Dustin Hoffman as Willy Loman. Shown on CBS, it attracted 25 million viewers. In late 1987, Miller's autobiography, Timebends was published. Before his autobiography was published, it was well known that that Miller would not talk about Monroe in interviews; in Timebends Miller talks about his experiences with Monroe in detail.During the early 1990s Miller wrote three new plays, The Ride Down Mt. Morgan (1991), The Last Yankee (1992), and Broken Glass (1994). In 1996, a film of The Crucible starring Daniel Day Lewis and Winona Ryder opened. Miller spent much of 1996 working on the screenplay to the film. Mr. Peters' Connections was staged off-Broadway in 1998, and Death of a Salesman was revived on Broadway in 1999 to celebrate its fiftieth anniversary. The play, once again, was a large critical success, winning a Tony Award for best revival of a play. On May 1, 2002, Miller was awarded Spain's Principe de Asturias Prize for Literature as "the undisputed master of modern drama." Previous winners include Doris Lessing, Gnter Grass and Carlos Fuentes. Later that year, Ingeborg Morath died of Lymphatic cancer at the age of 78. The following year Miller won the Jerusalem Prize.In December 2004, the 89-year-old Miller announced that he has been living with a 34-year-old minimalist painter Agnes Barley at his Connecticut farm since 2002, and that they intended to marry. Within hours of her father's death, Rebecca Miller ordered Barley to vacate the premises, having consistently opposed the relationship.Miller's final play, Finishing the Picture, opened at the Goodman Theatre, Chicago, in the fall of 2004. He stated that the work was based on the experience of filming The Misfits. 

Miller died at his home in Roxbury of congestive heart failure on the evening of February 10, 2005 (the 56th anniversary of the Broadway debut of Death of a Salesman) at the age of 89, surrounded by his family.

Miller's career as a writer spanned over seven decades, and at the time of his death in 2005, Miller was considered to be one of the greatest dramatists of the twentieth century, among the likes of Harold Pinter, Eugene O'Neill, Luigi Pirandello, Samuel Beckett, Jean-Paul Sartre, Bertolt Brecht, and Tennessee Williams. After his death, many respected actors, directors, and producers paid tribute to Miller, some calling him the last great practitioner of the American stage, and Broadway theaters darkened their lights in a show of respect.Miller's alma mater, the University of Michigan opened the Arthur Miller Theatre in March, 2007. Per his express wish, it is the only theater in the world that bears Miller's name. 

Miller's friend Professor Christopher Bigsby is currently working on Arthur Miller: The Definitive Biography, based on boxes of papers Miller made available to him before his death in 2005. The book will be published in November 2008, and is reported to reveal unpublished works in which Miller "bitterly attack[ed] the injustices of American racism long before it was taken up by the civil rights movement".













Bill Gates

William Henry "Bill" Gates III, KBE (born October 28, 1955), is an American business magnate, philanthropist, the world's third richest person (as of February 8, 2008), the second richest American (as of October 10, 2008), and chairman of Microsoft, the software company he founded with Paul Allen. During his career at Microsoft, Gates held the positions of CEO and chief software architect, and remains the largest individual shareholder with more than 8 percent of the common stock. He has also authored or co-authored several books.

Gates is one of the best-known entrepreneurs of the personal computer revolution. Although he is admired by many, a large number of industry insiders criticize his business tactics, which they consider anti-competitive, an opinion which has in some cases been upheld by the courts. In the later stages of his career, Gates has pursued a number of philanthropic endeavors, donating large amounts of money to various charitable organizations and scientific research programs through the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, established in 2000.

Bill Gates stepped down as chief executive officer of Microsoft in January, 2000. He remained as chairman and created the position of chief software architect. In June, 2006, Gates announced that he would be transitioning from full-time work at Microsoft to part-time work at Microsoft and full-time work at the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. He gradually transferred his duties to Ray Ozzie, chief software architect and Craig Mundie, chief research and strategy officer. Gates's last full-time day at Microsoft was June 27, 2008. He remains at Microsoft as a part-time, non-executive chairman.

Gates was born in Seattle, Washington, to William H. Gates, Sr. and Mary Maxwell Gates. His family was upper middle class; his father was a prominent lawyer, his mother served on the board of directors for First Interstate BancSystem and the United Way, and her father, J. W. Maxwell, was a national bank president. Gates has one older sister, Kristi (Kristianne), and one younger sister, Libby. He was the fourth of his name in his family, but was known as William Gates III or "Trey" because his father had dropped his own "III" suffix. Early on in his life, Gates's parents had a law career in mind for him.

At thirteen he enrolled in the Lakeside School, an exclusive preparatory school. When he was in the eighth grade, the Mothers Club at the school used proceeds from Lakeside School's rummage sale to buy an ASR-33 teletype terminal and a block of computer time on a General Electric (GE) computer for the school's students. Gates took an interest in programming the GE system in BASIC and was excused from math classes to pursue his interest. He wrote his first computer program on this machine: an implementation of tic-tac-toe that allowed users to play games against the computer. Gates was fascinated by the machine and how it would always execute software code perfectly. When he reflected back on that moment, he commented on it and said, "There was just something neat about the machine." After the Mothers Club donation was exhausted, he and other students sought time on systems including DEC PDP minicomputers. One of these systems was a PDP-10 belonging to Computer Center Corporation (CCC), which banned four Lakeside studentsGates, Paul Allen, Ric Weiland, and Kent Evansfor the summer after it caught them exploiting bugs in the operating system to obtain free computer time.

At the end of the ban, the four students offered to find bugs in CCC's software in exchange for computer time. Rather than use the system via teletype, Gates went to CCC's offices and studied source code for various programs that ran on the system, including programs in FORTRAN, LISP, and machine language. The arrangement with CCC continued until 1970, when it went out of business. The following year, Information Sciences Inc. hired the four Lakeside students to write a payroll program in COBOL, providing them computer time and royalties. After his administrators became aware of his programming abilities, Gates wrote the school's computer program to schedule students in classes. He modified the code so that he was placed in classes with mostly female students. He later stated that "it was hard to tear myself away from a machine at which I could so unambiguously demonstrate success." At age 17, Gates formed a venture with Allen, called Traf-O-Data, to make traffic counters based on the Intel 8008 processor.

Gates graduated from Lakeside School in 1973. He scored 1590 out of 1600 on the Scholastic Aptitude Test and subsequently enrolled at Harvard College in the fall of 1973. Prior to the mid 1990s, an SAT score of 1590 was equivalent to an IQ of about 170 (roughly the one in a million level), a figure that would frequently be cited by the press. While at Harvard, he met his future business partner, Steve Ballmer, whom he later appointed as CEO of Microsoft. He also met computer scientist Christos Papadimitriou at Harvard, with whom he collaborated on a paper about algorithms. He did not have a definite study plan while a student at Harvard and spent a lot of time using the school's computers. He remained in contact with Paul Allen, joining him at Honeywell during the summer of 1974. The following year saw the release of the MITS Altair 8800 based on the Intel 8080 CPU, and Gates and Allen saw this as the opportunity to start their own computer software company. He had talked this decision over with his parents, who were supportive of him after seeing how much Gates wanted to start a company.



After reading the January 1975 issue of Popular Electronics that demonstrated the Altair 8800, Gates contacted Micro Instrumentation and Telemetry Systems (MITS), the creators of the new microcomputer, to inform them that he and others were working on a BASIC interpreter for the platform. In reality, Gates and Allen did not have an Altair and had not written code for it; they merely wanted to gauge MITS's interest. MITS president Ed Roberts agreed to meet them for a demo, and over the course of a few weeks they developed an Altair emulator that ran on a minicomputer, and then the BASIC interpreter. The demonstration, held at MITS's offices in Albuquerque, was a success and resulted in a deal with MITS to distribute the interpreter as Altair BASIC. Paul Allen was hired into MITS, and Gates took a leave of absence from Harvard to work with Allen at MITS in Albuquerque in November 1975. They named their partnership "Micro-soft" and had their first office located in Albuquerque. Within a year, the hyphen was dropped, and on November 26, 1976, the trade name "Microsoft" was registered with the USPTO.

Microsoft's BASIC was popular with computer hobbyists, but Gates discovered that a pre-market copy had leaked into the community and was being widely copied and distributed. In February 1976, Gates wrote an Open Letter to Hobbyists in the MITS newsletter saying that MITS could not continue to produce, distribute, and maintain high-quality software without payment. This letter was unpopular with many computer hobbyists, but Gates persisted in his belief that software developers should be able to demand payment. Microsoft became independent of MITS in late 1976, and it continued to develop programming language software for various systems. The company moved from Albuquerque to its new home in Bellevue, Washington on January 1, 1979.

During Microsoft's early years, all employees had broad responsibility for the company's business. Gates oversaw the business details, but continued to write code as well. In the first five years, he personally reviewed every line of code the company shipped, and often rewrote parts of it as he saw fit.

In 1980 IBM approached Microsoft to make the BASIC interpreter for its upcoming personal computer, the IBM PC. When IBM's representatives mentioned that they needed an operating system, Gates referred them to Digital Research (DRI), makers of the widely used CP/M operating system.IBM's discussions with Digital Research went poorly, and they did not reach a licensing agreement. IBM representative Jack Sams mentioned the licensing difficulties during a subsequent meeting with Gates and told him to get an acceptable operating system. A few weeks later Gates proposed using 86-DOS (QDOS), an operating system similar to CP/M that Tim Paterson of Seattle Computer Products had made for hardware similar to the PC. Microsoft made a deal with SCP to become the exclusive licensing agent, and later the full owner, of 86-DOS. After adapting the operating system for the PC, Microsoft delivered it to IBM as PC-DOS in exchange for a one-time fee of $50,000. Gates insisted that IBM let Microsoft keep the copyright on the operating system, because he believed that other hardware vendors would clone IBM's system. They did, and the sales of MS-DOS made Microsoft a major player in the industry.

Gates oversaw Microsoft's company restructuring on June 25, 1981, which re-incorporated the company in Washington and made Gates President of Microsoft and the Chairman of the Board. Microsoft launched its first retail version of Microsoft Windows on November 20, 1985, and in August, the company struck a deal with IBM to develop a separate operating system called OS/2. Although the two companies successfully developed the first version of the new system, mounting creative differences undermined the partnership. Gates distributed an internal memo on May 16, 1991 announcing that the OS/2 partnership was over and Microsoft would shift its efforts to the Windows NT kernel development.

From Microsoft's founding in 1975 until 2006, Gates had primary responsibility for the company's product strategy. He aggressively broadened the company's range of products, and wherever Microsoft achieved a dominant position he vigorously defended it.

As an executive, Gates met regularly with Microsoft's senior managers and program managers. Firsthand accounts of these meetings describe him as verbally combative, berating managers for perceived holes in their business strategies or proposals that placed the company's long-term interests at risk.He often interrupted presentations with such comments as, "That's the stupidest thing I've ever heard!" and, "Why don't you just give up your options and join the Peace Corps?" The target of his outburst then had to defend the proposal in detail until, hopefully, Gates was fully convinced. When subordinates appeared to be procrastinating, he was known to remark sarcastically, "I'll do it over the weekend."

Gates's role at Microsoft for most of its history was primarily a management and executive role. However, he was an active software developer in the early years, particularly on the company's programming language products. He has not officially been on a development team since working on the TRS-80 Model 100 line, but wrote code as late as 1989 that shipped in the company's products. On June 15, 2006, Gates announced that he would transition out of his day-to-day role over the next two years to dedicate more time to philanthropy. He divided his responsibilities between two successors, placing Ray Ozzie in charge of day-to-day management and Craig Mundie in charge of long-term product strategy.

Many decisions that led to antitrust litigation over Microsoft's business practices have had Gates's approval. In the 1998 United States v. Microsoft case, Gates gave deposition testimony that several journalists characterized as evasive. He argued with examiner David Boies over the contextual meaning of words like "compete," "concerned," and "we." BusinessWeek reported:



Gates later said that he had simply resisted attempts by Boies to mischaracterize his words and actions. As to his demeanor during the deposition, he said, "Did I fence with Boies? ... I plead guilty. Whatever that penalty is should be levied against me: rudeness to Boies in the first degree." Despite Gates's denials, the judge ruled that Microsoft had committed monopolization and tying, blocking competition, in violation of the Sherman Antitrust Act.

The European Union Microsoft competition case is also a case brought by the European Commission of the European Union (EU) against Microsoft for abuse of its dominant position in the market (according to competition law). It started as a complaint from Novell over Microsoft's licensing practices in 1993, and eventually resulted in the EU ordering Microsoft to divulge certain information about its server products and release a version of Microsoft Windows without Windows Media Player.

Bill Gates decided in 2008 to appear in at least 1 commercial in a series of ads to promote Microsoft. This commercial, co-starring Jerry Seinfeld, is a 1 and a half minute talk between strangers as Seinfeld walks up on a discount shoe store (Shoe Circus) in a mall and notices Bill Gates buying shoes inside. The salesman is trying to sell Mr. Gates shoes that are a size too big. Mr. Seinfeld begins to inform him about a pair of shoes called Conquistadors that run "a little tight" and sells him on them in a size 10 (whereas the store clerk was attempting an 11). As Mr. Gates is buying the shoes he holds up his discount card, this card uses a slightly altered version of his own mugshot of his arrest in New Mexico in 1977 for a traffic violation . As they are walking out of the mall, Jerry Seinfeld asks Bill Gates if he has melded his mind to other developers, after getting a yes, he then asks if they are working on a way to make computers edible, again getting a yes. Most critics are still in debate over the exact meaning of this commercial saying that it is too vague to make sense to them. Though some say that it is an homage to Mr. Seinfeld's own show about "nothing"(Seinfeld). 

Gates married Melinda Gates (ne French) from Dallas, Texas on January 1, 1994. They have three children: Jennifer Katharine(1996), Rory John(1999) and Phoebe Adele(2002).Bill Gates' house is a 21st century earth-sheltered home in the side of a hill overlooking Lake Washington in Medina, Washington. According to King County public records, as of 2006, the total assessed value of the property (land and house) is $125 million, and the annual property tax is $991,000. Also among Gates's private acquisitions is the Codex Leicester, a collection of writings by Leonardo da Vinci, which Gates bought for $30.8 million at an auction in 1994. Gates is also known as an avid reader, and the ceiling of his large home library is engraved with a quotation from The Great Gatsby. He also enjoys playing bridge, tennis, and golf.

Gates was number one on the "Forbes 400" list from 1993 through to 2007 and number one on Forbes list of "The World's Richest People" from 1995 to 2007. In 1999, Gates's wealth briefly surpassed $101 billion, causing the media to call him a "centibillionaire". Since 2000, the nominal value of his Microsoft holdings has declined due to a fall in Microsoft's stock price after the dot-com bubble burst and the multi-billion dollar donations he has made to his charitable foundations. In a May 2006 interview, Gates commented that he wished that he were not the richest man in the world because he disliked the attention it brought. Gates has several investments outside Microsoft, which in 2006 paid him a salary of $616,667, and $350,000 bonus totalling $966,667. He founded Corbis, a digital imaging company, in 1989. In 2004 he became a director of Berkshire Hathaway, the investment company headed by long-time friend Warren Buffett. 

Gates began to realize the expectations others had of him when public opinion mounted that he could give more of his wealth to charity. Gates studied the work of Andrew Carnegie and John D. Rockefeller and in 1994 sold some of his Microsoft stock to create the William H. Gates Foundation. In 2000, Gates and his wife combined three family foundations into one to create the charitable Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, which is the largest transparently operated charitable foundation in the world. The foundation is setup to allow benefactors access how its money is being spent, unlike other major charitable organizations such as the Wellcome Trust. The generosity and extensive philanthropy of David Rockefeller has been credited as a major influence. Gates and his father have met with Rockefeller several times and have modeled their giving in part on the Rockefeller family's philanthropic focus, namely those global problems that are ignored by governments and other organizations. As of 2007 Bill and Melinda Gates were the second most generous philanthropist in America, having given over $28 billion to charity.

The foundation has also received criticism because it invests the assets that it has not yet distributed, with the exclusive goal of maximizing the return on investment. As a result, its investments include companies that have been criticized for worsening poverty in the same developing countries where the Foundation is attempting to relieve poverty. These include companies that pollute heavily and pharmaceutical companies that do not sell into the developing world.In response to press criticism, the foundation announced in 2007 a review of its investments to assess social responsibility. It subsequently cancelled the review and stood by its policy of investing for maximum return, while using voting rights to influence company practices.

Time magazine named Gates one of the 100 people who most influenced the 20th century, as well as one of the 100 most influential people of 2004, 2005, and 2006. Time also collectively named Gates, his wife Melinda and alternative rock band U2's lead singer Bono as the 2005 Persons of the Year for their humanitarian efforts. In 2006, he was voted eighth in the list of "Heroes of our time". Gates was listed in the Sunday Times power list in 1999, named CEO of the year by Chief Executive Officers magazine in 1994, ranked number one in the "Top 50 Cyber Elite" by Time in 1998, ranked number two in the Upside Elite 100 in 1999 and was included in The Guardian as one of the "Top 100 influential people in media" in 2001.

Gates has received honorary doctorates from Nyenrode Business Universiteit, Breukelen, The Netherlands in 2000, the Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden in 2002, Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan in 2005, Harvard University in June 2007, and from Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, in January 2008. Gates was also made an honorary Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire (KBE) from Queen Elizabeth II in 2005, in addition to having entomologists name the Bill Gates flower fly, Eristalis gatesi, in his honor.

In November 2006, he and his wife were awarded the Order of the Aztec Eagle for their philanthropic work around the world in the areas of health and education, particularly in Mexico, and specifically in the program "Un pas de lectores".

Gates has authored two books:













Arnold Schwarzenegger

Arnold Alois Schwarzenegger (German ; born July 30, 1947) is an Austrian-American bodybuilder, actor, businessman, and politician, currently serving as the 38th Governor of the state of California.

Schwarzenegger gained worldwide fame as a Hollywood action film icon. He was nicknamed "The Austrian Oak" and "The Styrian Oak" in his bodybuilding days, "Arnold Strong" and "Arnie" during his acting career, and more recently "The Governator" (a portmanteau of Governor and The Terminator, one of his film roles).

As a Republican, he was first elected on October 7, 2003, in a special recall election to replace then-Governor Gray Davis. Schwarzenegger was sworn in on November 17, 2003, to serve the remainder of Davis's term. Schwarzenegger was then re-elected on November 7, 2006, in California's 2006 gubernatorial election, to serve a full term as governor, defeating Democrat Phil Angelides, who was California State Treasurer at the time. Schwarzenegger was sworn in for a second term on January 5, 2007. In May 2004 and 2007, he was named as one of the Time 100 people who help shape the world.

Schwarzenegger is married to Maria Shriver and has four children.

Schwarzenegger was born in Thal, Austria (German: Thal bei Graz), a small village bordering the Styrian capital Graz, and was christened Arnold Alois Schwarzenegger. His parents were the local police chief Gustav Schwarzenegger (1907 1972), and his wife, Aurelia Jadrny (1922 1998). They were married on October 20, 1945 Gustav was 38, and Aurelia was a 23-year-old widow with a son named Meinhard. According to Schwarzenegger, both of his parents were very strict: "Back then in Austria it was a very different world, if we did something bad or we disobeyed our parents, the rod was not spared." He grew up in a Roman Catholic family who attended church service every Sunday.

Gustav had a preference for Meinhard, the elder of the two sons. His favoritism was "strong and blatant," which stemmed from unfounded suspicion "that Arnold wasnt his child." Schwarzenegger has said his father had "no patience for listening or understanding your problems there was a wall; a real wall." Schwarzenegger had a good relationship with his mother, and kept in touch with her until her death. In later life, Schwarzenegger commissioned the Simon Wiesenthal Centre to research his father's wartime record, which came up with no evidence of atrocities. At school, Schwarzenegger was apparently in the middle, but stood out for his "cheerful, good-humored and exuberant" character. Money was a problem in the household; Schwarzenegger has recalled that one of the highlights of his youth was when the family bought a refrigerator.

As a boy, Schwarzenegger played many sports—heavily influenced by his father. He picked up his first barbell in 1960, when his football coach took his team to a local gym. At the age of 14, Schwarzenegger chose bodybuilding over football (soccer) as a career. Schwarzenegger has responded to a question asking if he was age 13 when he started weightlifting: "I actually started weight training when I was fifteen, but I'd been participating in sports, like soccer, for years, so I felt that although I was slim, I was well-developed, at least enough so that I could start going to the gym and start Olympic lifting." However, his official website biography claims: "At 14, he started an intensive training program with Kurt Marnul, studied psychology at 15 (to learn more about the power of mind over body) and at 17, officially started his competitive career." During a speech in 2001, he said, "My own plan formed when I was 14 years old. My father had wanted me to be a police officer like he was. My mother wanted me to go to trade school." Schwarzenegger took to visiting a gym in Graz, where he also frequented the local movie theaters to see bodybuilding idols such as Reg Park, Steve Reeves, and Johnny Weissmuller on the big screen. "I was inspired by individuals like Reg Park and Steve Reeves." When Reeves passed away in 2000, Schwarzenegger fondly remembered him: "As a teenager, I grew up with Steve Reeves. His remarkable accomplishments allowed me a sense of what was possible, when others around me didn't always understand my dreams ... Steve Reeves has been part of everything I've ever been fortunate enough to achieve." In 1961, Schwarzenegger met former Mr. Austria Kurt Marnul, who invited him to train at the gym in Graz. He was so dedicated as a youngster that he was known to break into the local gym on weekends, when it was usually closed, so that he could train. "It would make me sick to miss a workout I knew I couldn't look at myself in the mirror the next morning if I didn't do it." When Schwarzenegger was asked about his first movie experience as a boy, he replied, "I was very young, but I remember my father taking me to the Austrian theaters and seeing some newsreels. The first real movie I saw, that I distinctly remember, was a John Wayne movie."

In 1971, his brother Meinhard died in a car accident. Meinhard had been drinking and was killed instantly, and Schwarzenegger did not attend his funeral. Meinhard was due to marry Erika Knapp, and the couple shared a three-year-old son Patrick. Schwarzenegger would pay for Patrick's education and a life in the United States. Gustav died the following year from a stroke. In Pumping Iron, Schwarzenegger claimed that he did not attend his father's funeral because he was training for a bodybuilding contest. Later, he and the film's producer both stated that this story was taken from another bodybuilder for the purpose of showing the extremes that some would go to for their sport, and to make Schwarzenegger's image more cold and machine-like to fan controversy for the film. Barbara Baker, his first serious girlfriend, has said he informed her of his father's death without emotion and that he never spoke of his brother. Over time, he has given at least three versions of why he did not attend his father's funeral.

In an interview with Fortune magazine in 2004, Schwarzenegger told how he suffered what "would now be called child abuse" at the hands of his father. "My hair was pulled. I was hit with belts. So was the kid next door. It was just the way it was. Many of the children I've seen were broken by their parents, which was the German-Austrian mentality. They didn't want to create an individual. It was all about conforming. I was one who did not conform, and whose will could not be broken. Therefore, I became a rebel. Every time I got hit, and every time someone said, 'you can't do this,' I said, 'this is not going to be for much longer, because I'm going to move out of here. I want to be rich. I want to be somebody.' "

Schwarzenegger served in the Austrian army in 1965 to fulfill the one year of service required at the time of all 18-year-old Austrian males. He won the Junior Mr. Europe contest in 1965. Schwarzenegger went AWOL during basic training so that he could take part in the competition and spent a week in an army jail: "Participating in the competition meant so much to me that I didn't carefully think through the consequences. When I got to Stuttgart, I was all confused. I forgot my posing routine, I had to borrow posing trunks, but still I won!" Contrary to popular belief, it was not Schwarzenegger's bodybuilding debut, which had occurred two years earlier at a minor contest in Graz, at Steirer Hof Hotel (where he had placed second). He was voted best built man of Europe, which made him famous.

"The Mr. Universe title was my ticket to America the land of opportunity, where I could become a star and get rich." Schwarzenegger made his first plane trip in 1966, attending the NABBA Mr. Universe competition in London. He would come in second in the Mr. Universe competition, not having the muscle definition of American winner Chester Yorton.

Charles "Wag" Bennett, one of the judges at the 1966 competition, was impressed with Schwarzenegger and offered to coach him. As Schwarzenegger had little money, Bennett invited him to stay in his crowded family home above one of his two gyms in Forest Gate. Yorton's leg definition had been judged superior, and Schwarzenegger, under a training program devised by Bennett, concentrated on improving the muscle definition and power in his legs. Staying in the East End of London helped Schwarzenegger improve his rudimentary grasp of the English language. The training paid off and in 1967 Schwarzenegger won the title for the first time in 1967, becoming the youngest ever Mr. Universe at the age of 20. He would go on to win the title a further four times. Schwarzenegger then flew back to Munich, training for four to six hours daily, attending business school and working in a health club (Rolf Putzinger's gym where he worked and trained from 1966-1968), returning in 1968 to London to win his next Mr. Universe title. He frequently told Roger C. Field, a friend in Munich at that time "I'm going to become the greatest actor!"

Schwarzenegger moved to the United States in September 1968 at the age of 21, speaking little English. "Naturally, when I came to this country, my accent was very bad, and my accent was also very strong, which was an obstacle as I began to pursue acting." There he trained at Gold's Gym in Santa Monica, California, under Joe Weider. From 1970 to 1974, one of Schwarzenegger's weight training partners was Ric Drasin, a professional wrestler who designed the original Gold's Gym logo in 1973. Schwarzenegger also became good friends with professional wrestler "Superstar" Billy Graham. In 1970, at age 23, he captured his first Mr. Olympia title in New York, and would go on to win the title a total of seven times.

In 1969, Schwarzenegger met Barbara Outland Baker, an English teacher he lived with until 1974. Schwarzenegger talked about Barbara in his memoir in 1977: "Basically it came down to this: she was a well-balanced woman who wanted an ordinary, solid life, and I was not a well-balanced man, and hated the very idea of ordinary life." Baker has described Schwarzenegger as "a joyful personality, totally charismatic, adventurous, and athletic" but claims towards the end of the relationship he became "insufferable classically conceited the world revolved around him." Baker published her memoir in 2006, entitled Arnold and Me: In the Shadow of the Austrian Oak. Although Baker, at times, paints an unflattering portrait of her former lover Schwarzenegger actually contributed to the tell-all book with a foreword, and also met with Baker for three hours. Baker claims, for example, that she only learned of his being unfaithful after they split, and talks of a turbulent and passionate love life. Schwarzenegger has made it clear that their respective recollection of events can differ. The couple first met six to eight months after his arrival in the U.S. their first date was watching the first Apollo Moon landing on television. They shared an apartment in Santa Monica for three and a half years, and having little money, would visit the beach all day, or have barbecues in the back yard. Although Baker claims that when she first met him, he had "little understanding of polite society" and she found him a turn-off, she says, "He's as much a self-made man as it's possible to be he never got encouragement from his parents, his family, his brother. He just had this huge determination to prove himself, and that was very attractive ... I'll go to my grave knowing Arnold loved me."

Schwarzenegger met his next love, Sue Moray, a Beverly Hills hairdresser's assistant, on Venice Beach in July 1977. According to Moray, the couple led an open relationship: "We were faithful when we were both in LA...but when he was out of town, we were free to do whatever we wanted." Schwarzenegger met Maria Shriver at the Robert F. Kennedy Tennis Tournament in August 1977, and went on to have a relationship with both women until August 1978, when Moray (who knew of his relationship with Shriver) issued an ultimatum.

Schwarzenegger has said his big dream from the age of 10 was to move to the U.S. He questioned what he was doing "on the farm" in Austria, and believed bodybuilding was his "ticket to America": "Im sure I can go to America if I win Mr. Universe." LA Weekly said in 2002 that Schwarzenegger is the most famous immigrant in America, who "overcame a thick Austrian accent and transcended the unlikely background of bodybuilding to become the biggest movie star in the world in the 1990s."



Schwarzenegger is considered among the most important figures in the history of bodybuilding, and his legacy is commemorated in the Arnold Classic annual bodybuilding competition. Schwarzenegger has remained a prominent face in the bodybuilding sport long after his retirement, in part because of his ownership of gyms and fitness magazines. He has presided over numerous contests and awards shows. For many years, he wrote a monthly column for the bodybuilding magazines Muscle & Fitness and Flex. Shortly after being elected Governor, he was appointed executive editor of both magazines, in a largely symbolic capacity. The magazines agreed to donate $250,000 a year to the Governor's various physical fitness initiatives. The magazine MuscleMag International has a monthly two-page article on him, and refers to him as "The King."

One of the first competitions he won was the Junior Mr. Europe contest in 1965. He won Mr. Europe the following year, at age 19. He would go on to compete in and win many bodybuilding contests, as well as some powerlifting contests, including five Mr. Universe (4 NABBA [England], 1 IFBB [USA]) wins, and seven Mr. Olympia wins, a record which would stand until Lee Haney won his eighth consecutive Mr. Olympia title in 1991.

In 1967, Schwarzenegger competed in and won the Munich stone-lifting contest, in which a stone weighing 508 German pounds (254 kg/560 lbs.) is lifted between the legs while standing on two foot rests. Schwarzenegger has said the following on his size: "During the peak of my career, my calves were 20 inches, thighs 28.5 inches, waist 34 inches, chest 57 inches, and 22-inch arms."

In a full squat (buttocks close to ground) Schwarzenegger had a personal record of 181 kg/400lbs, for twelve repetitions.

Schwarzenegger's goal was to become the greatest bodybuilder in the world, which meant becoming Mr. Olympia. His first attempt was in 1969, when he lost to three-time champion Sergio Oliva. However, Schwarzenegger came back in 1970 and won the competition making him the youngest ever Mr. Olympia at the age of 23, a record he holds to this day.

He continued his winning streak in the 1971 1974 competitions. In 1975, Schwarzenegger was once again in top form, and won the title for the sixth consecutive time, beating Franco Columbu. After the 1975 Mr. Olympia contest, Schwarzenegger announced his retirement from professional bodybuilding.

Months before the 1975 Mr. Olympia contest, filmmakers George Butler and Robert Fiore persuaded Schwarzenegger to compete, in order to film his training in the bodybuilding documentary called Pumping Iron. Schwarzenegger had only three months to prepare for the competition, after losing significant weight to appear in the film Stay Hungry with Jeff Bridges. Lou Ferrigno proved not to be a threat, and a lighter-than-usual Schwarzenegger convincingly won the 1975 Mr. Olympia. After being declared Mr. Olympia for a sixth consecutive time, Schwarzenegger retired from competition.

Schwarzenegger came out of retirement, however, to compete in the 1980 Mr. Olympia. Schwarzenegger was training for his role in Conan, and he got into such good shape because of the running, horseback riding, and sword training, that he decided he wanted to win the Mr. Olympia contest one last time. He kept this plan a secret, in the event that a training accident would prevent his entry and cause him to lose face. Schwarzenegger had been hired to provide color commentary for network television, when he announced at the eleventh hour that while he was there: "Why not compete?" Schwarzenegger ended up winning the event with only seven weeks of preparation. After being declared Mr. Olympia for a seventh time, Schwarzenegger officially retired from competition.

Schwarzenegger has admitted to using performance-enhancing anabolic steroids while they were legal, writing in 1967 that "steroids were helpful to me in maintaining muscle size while on a strict diet in preparation for a contest. I did not use them for muscle growth, but rather for muscle maintenance when cutting up." He has called the drugs "tissue building."

In 1999, Schwarzenegger sued Dr. Willi Heepe, a German doctor who publicly predicted an early death for the bodybuilder, based on a link between steroid use and later heart problems. Because the doctor had never examined him personally, Schwarzenegger collected a DM20,000 ($12,000 USD) libel judgment against him in a German court. In 1999, Schwarzenegger also sued and settled with The Globe, a U.S. tabloid which had made similar predictions about the bodybuilder's future health. As late as 1996, a year before open heart surgery to replace an aortic valve with a human homograft valve, Schwarzenegger publicly defended his use of anabolic steroids during his bodybuilding career.

Schwarzenegger was born with a bicuspid aortic valve, an aortic valve with only two leaflets (a normal aortic valve has three leaflets). Both his father and his brother had the same condition.





Schwarzenegger wanted to move from bodybuilding into acting, finally achieving it when he was chosen to play the role of Hercules in 1970's Hercules in New York. Credited under the name "Arnold Strong," his accent in the film was so thick that his lines were dubbed after production. His second film appearance was as a deaf and mute hit-man for the mob in director Robert Altman's The Long Goodbye (1973), which was followed by a much more significant part in the film Stay Hungry (1976), for which he was awarded a Golden Globe for New Male Star of the Year. Schwarzenegger has discussed his early struggles in developing his acting career. "It was very difficult for me in the beginning I was told by agents and casting people that my body was 'too weird,' that I had a funny accent, and that my name was too long. You name it, and they told me I had to change it. Basically, everywhere I turned, I was told that I had no chance."

Schwarzenegger drew attention and boosted his profile in the bodybuilding film Pumping Iron (1977), elements of which were dramatized. In 1991, Schwarzenegger purchased the rights to the film, its outtakes, and associated still photography. Schwarzenegger auditioned for the title role of The Incredible Hulk, but did not win the role due to his height. Later, Lou Ferrigno got the part of Dr. David Banner's alter ego. Schwarzenegger appeared with Kirk Douglas and Ann-Margret in the 1979 comedy The Villain.

Schwarzenegger's breakthrough film was the mythical epic Conan the Barbarian in 1982, which was a box-office hit. This was followed by a sequel, Conan the Destroyer in 1984, although its performance was disappointing. In 1983, Schwarzenegger starred in the promotional video "Carnival in Rio".



In 1984, he made the first of three appearances as the titular character in director James Cameron's science-fiction film The Terminator. Following The Terminator, Schwarzenegger made Red Sonja in 1985, which "sank without a trace."

During the 1980s, audiences had a large appetite for action films, with both Schwarzenegger and Sylvester Stallone becoming international stars. Schwarzenegger's roles reflected his droll, often self-deprecating sense of humor (including sometimes famously bad puns), separating his roles from more serious action hero fare. His alternative-universe comedy/thriller Last Action Hero featured a poster of the movie Terminator 2: Judgment Day which, in the fictional alternate universe, had Sylvester Stallone as its star.

Following his arrival as a Hollywood superstar, he made a number of successful films: Commando (1985), Raw Deal (1986), The Running Man (1987), and Red Heat (1988). In Predator (1987), another successful film, Schwarzenegger led a cast which included future Minnesota Governor Jesse Ventura (Ventura also appeared in The Running Man and Batman & Robin with Schwarzenegger) and future Kentucky Gubernatorial candidate Sonny Landham.

Twins (1988), a comedy with Danny DeVito, was a change of pace, and also proved successful. Total Recall (1990) netted Schwarzenegger $10 million and 15% of the gross, and was a widely praised, science-fiction script directed by Paul Verhoeven, based on the Philip K. Dick short story, "We Can Remember It for You Wholesale". Kindergarten Cop (1990) reunited him with director Ivan Reitman, who directed him in Twins.

Schwarzenegger had a brief foray into directing, first with a 1990 episode of the TV series Tales from the Crypt, entitled "The Switch," and then with the 1992 telemovie Christmas in Connecticut. He has not directed since.

Schwarzenegger's commercial high-water mark was the 1991 sequel to his 1984 hit The Terminator: , which was one of the highest-grossing films of the year. In 1993, the National Association of Theatre Owners named him the "International Star of the Decade." His next film project, the 1993 self-aware action comedy spoof Last Action Hero was released opposite Jurassic Park, with the box office suffering accordingly. His next film, the action comedy True Lies (1994) was a highly popular send-up of spy films, and saw Schwarzenegger, reunited with The Terminator director James Cameron, appearing opposite Jamie Lee Curtis.

Shortly thereafter came the comedy Junior (1994), directed by Twins director Ivan Reitman and again playing opposite co-star Danny DeVito. This film brought Schwarzenegger his second Golden Globe nomination, this time for Best Actor Musical or Comedy. It was followed by the action thriller Eraser (1996), and the comic book-based Batman & Robin (1997), where he played the villain Mr. Freeze. This was his final film before taking time to recuperate from a back injury. Following the failure of Batman & Robin, Schwarzenegger's film career and box office prominence went into decline.

Several film projects were announced with Schwarzenegger attached to star, including the remake of Planet of the Apes, a new film version of I Am Legend, and a World War II film scripted by Quentin Tarantino that would have seen Schwarzenegger play an Austrian.

Instead, he returned after a hiatus with the supernatural thriller ''End of Days'' (1999), later followed by the action films The 6th Day (2000) and Collateral Damage (2002). In 2003, he reprised his role in , which went on to earn over $150 million domestically.



In tribute to Schwarzenegger in 2002, Forum Stadtpark, a local cultural association, proposed plans to build a 25-meter (82-foot) tall Terminator statue in a park in central Graz. Schwarzenegger reportedly said he was flattered, but thought the money would be better spent on social projects and the Special Olympics.

His latest film appearances included a 3-second cameo appearance in The Rundown (AKA, Welcome to the Jungle) with The Rock, and the 2004 remake of Around the World in 80 Days, where he appeared onscreen with action star Jackie Chan for the first time.

Schwarzenegger voiced Baron von Steuben in Episode 24 ("Valley Forge") of Liberty's Kids.



Schwarzenegger has been a registered Republican for many years. As an actor, his political views were always well-known as they contrasted with those of many other prominent Hollywood stars, who are generally considered to be a liberal and Democratic-leaning community. At the 2004 Republican National Convention, Schwarzenegger gave a speech and explained why he was a Republican:



In 1985, Schwarzenegger appeared in Stop the Madness, an anti-drug music video sponsored by the Reagan administration. He first came to wide public notice as a Republican during the 1988 Presidential election, accompanying then-Vice President George H.W. Bush at a campaign rally.

Schwarzenegger's first political appointment was as chairman of the President's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports, on which he served from 1990 to 1993. He was nominated by George H. W. Bush, who dubbed him "Conan the Republican". He later served as Chairman for the California Governor's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports under Governor Pete Wilson. Yet, political analysts have identified Schwarzenegger as a liberal, as he has become more left-leaning since his election.

Between 1993 and 1994, Schwarzenegger was a Red Cross ambassador (a mostly ceremonial role fulfilled by celebrities), recording several television/radio public service announcements to give blood. A small amount of interest was garnered by his wearing of a white t-shirt with the Red Cross on it, while posing with a flexed arm; the image made it into several celebrity magazines.

In an interview with Talk magazine in late 1999, Schwarzenegger was asked if he thought of running for office. He replied, "I think about it many times. The possibility is there, because I feel it inside." The Hollywood Reporter claimed shortly after that Schwarzenegger sought to end speculation that he might run for governor of California. Following his initial comments, Schwarzenegger said, "I'm in show business I am in the middle of my career. Why would I go away from that and jump into something else?"

Schwarzenegger announced his candidacy in the 2003 California recall election for Governor of California on the August 6, 2003 episode of The Tonight Show with Jay Leno. As a candidate in the recall election, Schwarzenegger had the most name recognition in a crowded field of candidates, but he had never held public office and his political views were unknown to most Californians. His candidacy immediately became national and international news, with media outlets dubbing him the "Governator" (referring to The Terminator movies, see above) and "The Running Man" (the name of another one of his films), and calling the recall election "Total Recall" (yet another Schwarzenegger starrer). Schwarzenegger declined to participate in several debates with other recall replacement candidates, and appeared in only one debate on September 24, 2003.

On October 7, 2003, the recall election resulted in Governor Gray Davis being removed from office with 55.4% of the Yes vote in favor of a recall. Schwarzenegger was elected Governor of California under the second question on the ballot with 48.6% of the vote to choose a successor to Davis. Schwarzenegger defeated Democrat Cruz Bustamante, fellow Republican Tom McClintock, and others. His nearest rival, Bustamante, received less than 30% of the vote. In total, Schwarzenegger won the election by about 1.3 million votes. Under the regulations of the California Constitution, no runoff election was required. Schwarzenegger was the first foreign-born governor of California since Ireland-born Governor John G. Downey in 1862.

As soon as Schwarzenegger was elected governor, Willie Brown said he would start a drive to recall the governor. Schwarzenegger was equally entrenched in what he considered to be his mandate in cleaning up gridlock. Building on a catchphrase from a sketch partly parodying his bodybuilding career, Schwarzenegger called the Democratic State politicians "girlie men," (a reference from a Saturday Night Live sketch called "Hans and Franz").



Schwarzenegger enjoyed a large degree of success and victories in his early governorship, including repealing an unpopular increase in the vehicle registration fee as well as preventing driver's licenses being given out to illegal immigrants, but later began to feel the backlash when powerful state unions began to oppose his various initiatives. Key among his reckoning with political realities was a special election he called in November 2005, in which four ballot measures he sponsored were defeated. Schwarzenegger accepted personal responsibility for the defeats and vowed to continue to seek consensus for the people of California. He would later comment that "no one could win if the opposition raised 160 million dollars to defeat you."

Schwarzenegger then went against the advice of fellow Republican strategists and appointed a Democrat, Susan Kennedy, as his Chief of Staff. Schwarzenegger gradually moved towards a more politically moderate position, determined to build a winning legacy with only a short time to go until the next gubernatorial election.

He has appeared alongside his fellow actor from Around the World in 80 Days, Jackie Chan, in a government advertisement to combat copyright infringement.

Schwarzenegger ran for re-election against Democrat Phil Angelides, the California State Treasurer, in the 2006 elections, held on November 7, 2006. Despite a poor year nationally for the Republican party, Schwarzenegger won re-election with 56.0% of the vote compared with 38.9% for Angelides, a margin of well over one million votes. The election further enhanced his political credentials.

It is rumored that Schwarzenegger might run for the United States Senate in 2010 (he will be term-limited then), if incumbent Senator Barbara Boxer retires.

Wendy Leigh, who wrote an unofficial biography on Schwarzenegger, claims he plotted his political rise from an early age using the movie business and bodybuilding as building blocks to escape a depressing home. Leigh portrays Schwarzenegger as obsessed with power and quotes him as saying, "I wanted to be part of the small percentage of people who were leaders, not the large mass of followers. I think it is because I saw leaders use 100% of their potential I was always fascinated by people in control of other people." Schwarzenegger has said that it was never his intention to enter politics, but he says, "I married into a political family. You get together with them and you hear about policy, about reaching out to help people. I was exposed to the idea of being a public servant and Eunice and Sargent Shriver became my heroes." Eunice Kennedy Shriver was sister of John F. Kennedy, and mother-in-law to Schwarzenegger, Sargent Shriver is husband to Eunice and father-in-law to Schwarzenegger. According to the 2005 Year-in-Review issue of Time magazine, supporters of Schwarzenegger are hoping to amend the Constitution so that he can run for President of the United States. Indeed, in The Simpsons Movie, Schwarzenegger is portrayed as the President and in the Sylvester Stallone movie Demolition Man, it is revealed there was an amendment to the constitution that allowed him to become President.

Schwarzenegger is a dual Austria/United States citizen. He holds Austrian citizenship by birth and has held U.S. citizenship since becoming naturalized in 1983. Being Austrian and thus European he was able to win the 2007 European Voice campaigner of the year award for taking action against climate change with the California Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006 and plans to introduce an emissions trading scheme with other US states and possibly with the EU.

Schwarzenegger does not accept his governor's salary of $175,000 per year, and instead donates it to charities.

Schwarzenegger's endorsement in the Republican primary of the 2008 U.S. Presidential election was highly sought; despite being good friends with candidates Rudy Giuliani and Senator John McCain, Schwarzenegger remained neutral throughout 2007 and early 2008. Giuliani dropped out of the Presidential race on January 30, 2008, largely because of a poor showing in Florida, and endorsed McCain. Later that night, Schwarzenegger was in the audience at a Republican debate at the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library in Simi Valley, California. The following day, he endorsed McCain, joking, "It's Rudy's fault!" (in reference to his friendships with both candidates and that he could not make up his mind). Schwarzenegger's endorsement was thought to be a boost for Senator McCain's campaign; both spoke about their environmental concerns and concerns for the economy.

Governor Schwarzenegger played a significant role in opposing Proposition 66, a proposed amendment of the Californian Three Strikes Law, in November 2004. This amendment would have required the third felony to be either violent and/or serious in order to mandate a 25-years-to-life sentence. In the last week before the ballot, governor Arnold Schwarzenegger launched an intensive campaign against Proposition 66. He stated that "it would release 26,000 dangerous criminals and rapists".





On September 27, 2006 Schwarzenegger signed a bill creating the nations first cap on greenhouse gas emissions. The law set new regulations on the amount of emissions utilities, refineries and manufacturing plants are allowed to release into the atmosphere. Schwarzenegger also signed a second global warming bill that prohibits large utilities and corporations in California from making long-term contracts with suppliers who do not meet the states greenhouse gas emission standards. The two bills are part of a plan to reduce Californias emissions by 25 percent to 1990s levels by 2020. In 2005, Schwarzenegger issued an executive order calling to reduce greenhouse gases to 80 percent below 1990 levels by 2050.

Schwarzenegger signed another executive order on October 17, 2006 allowing California to work with the Northeasts Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative. They plan to reduce carbon dioxide emissions by issuing a limited amount of carbon credits to each power plant in participating states. Any power plants that exceed emissions for the amount of carbon credits they have will have to purchase more credits to cover the difference. The plan is set to be in effect in 2009.In addition to using his political power to fight global warming, the governor has taken steps at his home to reduce his personal carbon footprint. Schwarzenegger has adapted one of his Hummers to run on hydrogen and another to run on biofuels. He has also installed solar panels to heat his home.

In 1977, Schwarzenegger's autobiography/weight-training guide Arnold: The Education of a Bodybuilder was published and became a huge success. After taking English classes at Santa Monica College in Santa Monica, California, he earned a B.A., from the University of Wisconsin-Superior, where he graduated Business and International Economics, in 1979.

On April 26, 1986, Schwarzenegger married television journalist Maria Shriver, niece of the past President of the United States John F. Kennedy in Hyannis, Massachusetts. The Rev. John Baptist Riordan performed the ceremony at St. Francis Xavier Roman Catholic Church. They have four children: Katherine Eunice Shriver Schwarzenegger (born December 13, 1989 in Los Angeles, California); Christina Maria Aurelia Schwarzenegger (born July 23, 1991 in Los Angeles, California); Patrick Arnold Schwarzenegger (born September 18, 1993 in Los Angeles, California); and Christopher Sargent Shriver Schwarzenegger (born September 27, 1997 in Los Angeles, California)

Schwarzenegger and his family currently live in their 11,000-square-foot (1 022 m) home in Brentwood. They used to own a home in the Pacific Palisades. The family owns vacation homes in Sun Valley, Idaho and Hyannis Port, Massachusetts. Schwarzenegger does not have a home in Sacramento. However, whenever he is in the state capitol, he lives in the Hyatt Regency hotel suite. The suite costs about $65,000 a year.

On Sundays, the family attends Mass at St. Monica's Catholic Church.

Schwarzenegger has said he believes the secret of a good marriage is love and respect. "If you have the ultimate love for your wife and she has it for you, I think you have a great head start That's not to say it won't be difficult sometimes. You go through your ups and downs but you work through it." Schwarzenegger has talked about parenthood in 2000: "One of the best things you can do with your children is play with them. At the same time, I act very silly. Many times I do a lot of sports with them. I play games with them. Act out parts. We do little plays, sometimes."

His official height of 6'2" (188 cm) has been brought into question by several articles. In his bodybuilding days in the late 1960s, he was measured to be 6'1.5", a height confirmed by his fellow bodybuilders. In 1988 both the Daily Mail and Time Out magazine mentioned that Schwarzenegger appeared noticeably shorter than this publicised figure. More recently, before running for Governor, Schwarzenegger's height was once again questioned in an article by the Chicago Reader. As Governor, Schwarzenegger engaged in a light-hearted exchange with Assemblyman Herb Wesson over their heights. At one point Wesson made an unsuccessful attempt to, in his own words, "settle this once and for all and find out how tall he is." by using a tailor's tape measure on the Governor. Schwarzenegger later retaliated by placing a pillow stitched with the words "Need a lift?" on the five-foot-five (165 cm) Wessons chair before a negotiating session in his office. The debate on Schwarzenegger's height has spawned a website solely dedicated to it, and his page remains one of the most active on CelebHeights.com, a website which discusses the heights of celebrities.

In 2005, Peter Pilz, from the Austrian Green Party, demanded that parliament revoke Schwarzenegger's Austrian citizenship. This demand was based on Article 33 of the Austrian Citizenship Act that states: A citizen, who is in the public service of a foreign country, shall be deprived of his citizenship, if he heavily damages the reputation or the interests of the Austrian Republic. Pilz claimed that Schwarzenegger's actions in support of the death penalty (prohibited in Austria under Protocol 13 of the European Convention on Human Rights) had indeed done damage to Austria's reputation. Schwarzenegger explained his actions by referring to the fact that his only duty as Governor of California was to prevent an error in the judicial system.

In honor of its most famous son, Schwarzenegger's home town of Graz had its soccer stadium named The Arnold Schwarzenegger Stadium. It is the home of both Grazer AK and Sturm Graz. Following the Stanley Williams execution and after street protests in his hometown, several local politicians began a campaign to remove Schwarzenegger's name from the stadium. Schwarzenegger responded, saying that "to spare the responsible politicians of the city of Graz further concern, I withdraw from them as of this day the right to use my name in association with the Liebenau Stadium," and set a tight deadline of just a couple of days to remove his name. Graz officials removed Schwarzenegger's name from the stadium in December 2005. It is now officially titled UPC-Arena.

The Sun Valley Resort has a short ski trail called Arnold's Run, named after Schwarzenegger (It was named after him in 2001). The trail is categorized as a black diamond, or most difficult, for its terrain.

He bought the first Hummer manufactured for civilian use in 1992, a model so large, 6,300 lb (2900 kg) and 7 feet (2.1 m) wide, that it is classified as a large truck and U.S. fuel economy regulations do not apply to it. During the Gubernatorial Recall campaign he announced that he would convert one of his Hummers to burn hydrogen. The conversion was reported to have cost about US$21,000. After the election, he signed an executive order to jump-start the building of hydrogen refueling plants called the California Hydrogen Highway Network, and gained a U.S. Department of Energy grant to help pay for its projected US$91,000,000 cost. California took delivery of the first H2H (Hydrogen Hummer) in October 2004.

People in Thal bei Graz celebrated Schwarzenegger's 60th birthday by throwing a party. Officials proclaimed A Day for Arnold on July 30, 2007. Thal 145, the number of the house where Schwarzenegger was born, belonged to Schwarzenegger and nobody will ever be assigned to that number.

Schwarzenegger broke his right femur while skiing in Sun Valley, Idaho with his family on December 23, 2006. He tripped over his ski pole on Lower Warm Springs run on Bald Mountain, an 'easy' or green level run. He is an expert level skier. On December 26, 2006, he underwent a 90-minute operation in which cables and screws were used to wire the broken bone back together. He was released from the St. John's Health Center on December 30, 2006. Schwarzenegger did not delay his second oath of office on January 5, 2007, although he was still on crutches at the time.

Schwarzenegger has twice crashed motorcycles on public highways, injuring himself in the process. On January 8, 2006, while riding his Harley Davidson motorcycle in Los Angeles, with his son Patrick in the sidecar, another driver backed into the street he was riding on, causing him and his son to collide with the car at a low speed. While his son and the other driver were unharmed, the governor sustained a minor injury to his lip, forcing him to get 15 stitches. "No citations were issued" said Officer Jason Lee, a Los Angeles Police Department spokesman. Schwarzenegger, who famously rode motorcycles in the ''Terminator'' movies, has never obtained an M-1 or M-2 endorsement on his California driver's license that would allow him to legally ride a motorcycle without a sidecar on the street. Previously, on December 9, 2001, he broke six ribs and was hospitalized for four days after a motorcycle crash in Los Angeles.

Schwarzenegger opted in 1997 for a replacement heart valve made of his own transplanted tissue; medical experts predict he will require heart valve replacement surgery in the next two to eight years as his current valve degrades. Schwarzenegger apparently opted against a mechanical valve, the only permanent solution available at the time of his surgery, because it would have sharply limited his physical activity and capacity to exercise.

He saved a drowning man's life in 2004 while on vacation in Hawaii by swimming out and bringing him back to shore.

Arnold Schwarzenegger has also had a highly successful business career. Following his move to the United States, Schwarzenegger became a "prolific goal setter" and would write his objectives at the start of the year on index cards, like starting a mail order business or buying a new car and succeed in doing so. By the age of 30, Schwarzenegger was a millionaire, well before his career in Hollywood. His financial independence came from a series of successful business ventures and investments. In 1968, Schwarzenegger and fellow bodybuilder Franco Columbu started a bricklaying business. The business flourished thanks to the pair's marketing savvy and an increased demand following a major Los Angeles earthquake in 1971. Schwarzenegger and Columbu used profits from their bricklaying venture to start a mail order business, selling bodybuilding and fitness-related equipment and instructional tapes. Schwarzenegger rolled profits from the mail order business and his bodybuilding competition winnings into his first real estate venture: an apartment building he purchased for $10,000. He would go on to invest in a number of real estate holding companies. In 1992, Schwarzenegger and his wife opened a restaurant in Santa Monica called Schatzi On Main. Schatzi literally means "little treasure," colloquial for "honey" or "darling" in German. In 1998, he sold his restaurant. He invested in a shopping mall in Columbus, Ohio. He has talked about some of those who have helped him over the years in business: "I couldn't have learned about business without a parade of teachers guiding me... from Milton Friedman to Donald Trump... and now, Les Wexner and Warren Buffett. I even learned a thing or two from Planet Hollywood, such as when to get out! And I did!" He has significant ownership in Dimensional Fund Advisors, an investment firm.

Arnold Schwarzenegger was a founding celebrity investor in the Planet Hollywood chain of international theme restaurants (modeled after the Hard Rock Cafe) along with Bruce Willis, Sylvester Stallone, and Demi Moore. Schwarzenegger severed his financial ties with the business in early 2000. Schwarzenegger said the company had not had the success he had hoped for, claiming he wanted to focus his attention on "new US global business ventures" and his movie career.

Schwarzenegger's net worth has been conservatively estimated at $100 $200 million. Over the years, he invested his bodybuilding and movie earnings in an array of stocks, bonds, privately controlled companies, and real estate holdings in the U.S. and worldwide, so his fortune is sometimes estimated as high as $800 million. In June 1997, Schwarzenegger spent $38 million of his own money on a private Gulfstream Jet. Schwarzenegger once said of his fortune, "Money doesn't make you happy. I now have $50 million, but I was just as happy when I had $48 million." "I've made many millions as a businessman many times over."

During his initial campaign for governor, allegations of sexual and personal misconduct were raised against Schwarzenegger (dubbed Gropegate). Within the last five days before the election, news reports appeared in the Los Angeles Times recounting allegations of sexual misconduct from several individual women, six of whom eventually came forward with their personal stories.

Three of the women claimed he had grabbed their breasts, a fourth said he placed his hand under her skirt on her buttock. A fifth woman claimed Schwarzenegger tried to take off her bathing suit in a hotel elevator, and the last says he pulled her onto his lap and asked her about a particular sex act.

Schwarzenegger admitted that he has "behaved badly sometimes" and apologized, but also stated that "a lot of (what) you see in the stories is not true." This came after an interview in adult magazine Oui from 1977 surfaced, in which Schwarzenegger discussed attending sexual orgies and using substances like marijuana. Schwarzenegger is shown smoking a marijuana joint after winning Mr. Olympia in the 1975 documentary film Pumping Iron. In an interview with GQ magazine in October 2007, Schwarzenegger said, "[Marijuana] is not a drug. It's a leaf. My drug was pumping iron, trust me." His spokesperson later said the comment was meant to be a joke.

British television personality Anna Richardson settled a libel lawsuit in August 2006 against Schwarzenegger and two of his top aides, Sean Walsh and publicist Sheryl Main. A joint statement read: "The parties are content to put this matter behind them and are pleased that this legal dispute has now been settled." Richardson claimed they tried to tarnish her reputation by dismissing her allegations that Schwarzenegger touched her breast during a press event (for The Sixth Day) in London. She claimed Walsh and Main libeled her in a Los Angeles Times article when they contended she encouraged his behavior.











Bill Oddie

William Edgar Oddie, OBE (born 7 July 1941) is an English actor, writer, comedian, natural history presenter and musician. He became famous as one of the The Goodies.

A birdwatcher since his childhood in Birmingham, Oddie has now established a reputation for himself as an ornithologist, conservationist and television presenter on wildlife issues. Some of his books are illustrated with his own paintings and drawings.

Oddie's wildlife programmes for the BBC include: Springwatch / Autumnwatch, How to Watch Wildlife, Wild In Your Garden, Birding with Bill Oddie, Britain Goes Wild with Bill Oddie and Bill Oddie Goes Wild.

After attending Halesowen Grammar School (now The Earls High School, Halesowen) then King Edward's School, Birmingham, Oddie studied English Literature at Pembroke College at the University of Cambridge, where he appeared in several Cambridge University Footlights Club productions. One of these, a revue called A Clump of Plinths, was so successful during its run at the Edinburgh Fringe Festival that it was renamed Cambridge Circus and transferred to the West End in London, then New Zealand and Broadway in September 1964. Meanwhile, still at Cambridge, Oddie wrote scripts for TV's That Was The Week That Was. 

His first television appearance was in Bernard Braden's On The Braden Beat in 1964. Subsequently, he was a key member of the performers in the cult BBC radio series I'm Sorry, I'll Read That Again (ISIRTA; 1965), where many of his musical compositions were featured. Some were released on the album Distinctly Oddie (Polydor, 1967). He was possibly one of the first performers to parody a rock song, arranging the traditional Yorkshire folk song "On Ilkla Moor Baht'at" in the style of Joe Cocker's hit rendition of the Beatles' "With a Little Help from My Friends" (released on John Peel's Dandelion Records in 1970 and featured in Peel's special box of most-treasured singles), and singing "Andy Pandy" in the style of a brassy soul number such as Wilson Pickett or Geno Washington might perform. In many shows he would do short impressions of Hughie Green. 

In one song on I'm Sorry, I'll Read That Again, Oddie performed "What a Wonderful World" with a voice fully reminiscent of Louis Armstrong. During the course of the song, the rest of the cast attributed the gravelly quality of his voice to a sore throat. In the background, during the rest of the song, it is possible to hear the cast dispense cough medicine, then call for a doctor, the arrival of the doctor and his decision that Oddie should go into hospital, the trip to hospital in an ambulance, and the operation extracting his tonsils. After this, the sound of his voice changed to a sound closer to that of Harry Secombe. He thanked the cast for curing him.

On television Oddie was co-writer and performer in the comedy series Twice a Fortnight with Graeme Garden, Terry Jones, Michael Palin and Jonathan Lynn. Later, he was co-writer and performer in the comedy series Broaden Your Mind with Tim Brooke-Taylor and Graeme Garden, for which Oddie became a cast member for the second series. 

Oddie, Brooke-Taylor and Garden then co-wrote and appeared in their television comedy series The Goodies. With long hair and a poster of Che Guevara in his corner, Bill portrayed the rebel, to Brooke-Taylor's patriotic conservative and Garden's boffin. The Goodies also released records, including "Father Christmas Do Not Touch Me"/"The In-Betweenies", "Funky Gibbon", and "Black Pudding Bertha", which were hit singles in 1974/5. They reformed, briefly, in 2005, for a successful 13-date tour of Australia. Oddie, Brooke-Taylor and Garden also voiced characters on the 1983 animated children's programme Bananaman, in which Oddie voiced the characters of "Crow", "Chief O'Reilly", "Doctor Gloom", "Eric" and "The Weatherman".

In the Amnesty International show A Poke In The Eye (With A Sharp Stick), Oddie, Brooke-Taylor and Garden sang their hit song "Funky Gibbon". The trio also appeared on "Top of the Pops" with the song. Together with Garden (who is a qualified doctor), Oddie co-wrote many episodes of the television comedy series Doctor in the House, including most of the first season and all of the second season. He has occasionally appeared on the BBC Radio 4 panel game I'm Sorry I Haven't a Clue, on which Garden and Brooke-Taylor are regular panellists. In 1982 Garden and Oddie wrote, but did not perform in, a 6-part science fiction sitcom called Astronauts for Central and ITV. The show was set in an international space station in the near future

Oddie has hosted a number of very successful nature programmes for the BBC, many produced by Stephen Moss, including:

On its first evening of broadcast, Britain Goes Wild set a record for its timeslot of 8pm on BBC Two of 3.4 million viewers, one million more than the Channel 4 programme showing at that time. It also created a run on nest boxes for  and bumble bees, bird baths and bird feed from suppliers. Britain Goes Wild, soon renamed Springwatch, became a wildlife broadcasting phenomenon, with viewers at some times shooting up to 5 million.

He played the drums and saxophone and appeared as Cousin Kevin in a production of The Who's rock opera Tommy at the Rainbow Theatre, Finsbury Park, London on 9 December 1972. He has also contributed vocals to a Rick Wakeman album, "Criminal Record". 

Oddie took part in the English National Opera production of the Gilbert and Sullivan comic opera The Mikado, in which he appeared in the role of the "Lord High Executioner", taking over the role from Eric Idle. During the early 1990s, Oddie was a DJ for London based jazz radio station, 102.2 Jazz FM, but was dismissed after criticising the management on air after they told him he was playing too much jazz on his show.

In 2007 Oddie appeared on the BBC series Play It Again. In the episode he attempts to realise his dream of becoming a rock guitarist. Initially teacher Bridget Mermikides tries to teach him using traditional methods but he rebels: instead he turns to old friends Albert Lee, Dave Davies (The Kinks) and Mark Knopfler for advice and strikes out on his own. He succeeds in the target of playing lead guitar for his daughter Rosie's band at her 21st birthday party, and even manages to impress his erstwhile teacher.

Oddie appeared as the hapless window cleaner in the Eric Sykes' comedy story The Plank in 1967. 

He also presented the live children's Saturday morning entertainment show Saturday Banana (ITV/Southern Television) during the late 1970's.

In the late 1980s he was a presenter of the BBC TV show Fax (A show about 'facts').

In the 1990s he became better known as a presenter of birdwatching, and later wildlife related programmes such as Springwatch. Although he remains almost unknown to US audiences, in 1992 he was a guest star in the US comedy television series Married with Children for a 3-part episode set in England.

He was the compre of a daytime BBC gameshow, History Hunt (in 2003); and has appeared in the Doctor Who audio drama Doctor Who and the Pirates. In 2004, he appeared in the BBC show Who Do You Think You Are?, in which he looked into his ancestry. In 2005, he took part in Rolf on Art — the big event at Trafalgar Square. 

In the fictional world of comedy character Alan Partridge, Oddie is an unseen presence in Alan's life.

In 2006 Oddie appeared in the BBC show Never Mind The Buzzcocks. and also appeared on the topical quiz show 8 out of 10 Cats. Bill also is the voice behind many B&Q adverts throughout 2006/2007. On 25 May 2007, Oddie made a cameo appearance on Ronni Ancona's new comedy sketch show, Ronni Ancona & Co.

He hosted the genealogy based series My Famous Family, broadcast on UKTV History in 2007.

In 2008, Oddie was a guest on Jamie Oliver's television special Jamie's Fowl Dinners, talking about free-range chickens.

Oddie's first published work was an article about the bird life of Birmingham's Bartley Reservoir in the West Midland Bird Club's 1962 Annual Report. He has since written a number of books about birds and bird watching, as well as articles for many specialist publications including ''British Birds'', Birdwatching Magazine and Birdwatch. He became president of the West Midland Bird Club in 1999, having been Vice-President since 1991, and is a former member of the council of the RSPB. Oddie is also a vice-president of the League Against Cruel Sports.

In "serious" ornithological writing, Oddie's name is usually given formally, as "W. E. Oddie".

Oddie was born in Rochdale on 7 July 1941 to Lilian and Harry, who also had a daughter, Margaret Jean Oddie, but she died when 5 days old on 21 January 1940. Oddie lived at Oak Tree Crescent, Quinton, Birmingham from about age 6 to 15, brought up by his father, Harry, and his father's mother, Emily. Oddie has no memory of his mother, Lilian, living at home. As a child she worked in a cotton mill under harsh conditions. She suffered from a chronic mental illness, perhaps manic depression or schizophrenia, and abandoned Oddie at an early age. She a was a long-term inpatient in Barnsley Hall Hospital, Bromsgrove, for more than 20 years, having been first admitted as a voluntary patient at the age of 36 years. When Harry was 17 years old his father, Wilkinson Oddie, died of heart failure on 23 February 1927, a post-operative death, after an operation for carcinoma of the left tonsil, which used chloroform as an anaesthetic. Oddie developed a hobby in bird spotting, and his father encouraged school education.

Oddie is married to Laura Beaumont, with whom he has worked on a variety of projects for children, including film scripts, drama and comedy series, puppet shows and books. They have a daughter, Rosie, and live in Hampstead, London.

Bill Oddie also has two daughters from his first marriage (to Jean Hart), Bonnie, and the actress Kate Hardie, and a grandson, Lyle.

Oddie is known throughout the industry for his mood swings and often truculent behaviour, which contrasts sharply with his 'loveable' public image. He himself has often acknowledged that he has been a life-long sufferer of clinical depression.

In 2001, Oddie became the third person to turn down the "red book" and declined to appear on This Is Your Life. He changed his mind a few hours later though and agreed to appear on the show. On 16 October 2003, Oddie was made an OBE for his service to Wildlife Conservation in a ceremony at Buckingham Palace. He played down the event, choosing to wear a camouflage shirt and crumpled jacket to receive his medal. In June 2004, Oddie and Johnny Morris were jointly profiled in the first of a three part BBC Two series, The Way We Went Wild, about television wildlife presenters. In May 2005, he received the British Naturalists' Association's Peter Scott Memorial Award, from BNA president David Bellamy, "in recognition of his great contribution to our understanding of natural history and conservation".

(incomplete list)

Bill Oddie also co-wrote the Springwatch & Autumnwatch book with Kate Humble and Simon King.

Co-written with the other members of The Goodies:

Co-written with Laura Beaumont:







Albert Camus

Albert Camus () (7 November 1913 4 January 1960) was an Algerian-born French author, philosopher, and journalist who won the Nobel prize in 1957. He is often associated with existentialism, but Camus refused this label. On the other hand, as he wrote in his essay The Rebel, his whole life was devoted to opposing the philosophy of nihilism. On the subject of his belief or not in God, he writes in the third volume of his notebooks: "I do not believe in God and I am not an atheist."

In 1949, Camus founded the Group for International Liaisons in the Revolutionary Union Movement, according to the book Albert Camus, une vie by Olivier Todd, a group opposed to the atheist and communistic tendencies of the surrealistic movement of Andr Breton. Camus was the second-youngest recipient of the Nobel Prize for Literature (after Rudyard Kipling) when he became the first African-born writer to receive the award, in 1957. He is also the shortest-lived of any literature laureate to date, having died in an automobile accident only three years after receiving the award.

Camus preferred to be known as a man and a thinker, rather than as a member of a school or ideology. He preferred persons over ideas. In an interview in 1945, Camus rejected any ideological associations: "No, I am not an existentialist. Sartre and I are always surprised to see our names linked"

Albert Camus was born on 7 November 1913 in Mondovi, Algeria to a French-Algerian (pied-noir) settler family. His mother was of Spanish extraction and was half-deaf. His father, Lucien, died in the Battle of the Marne in 1914 during the First World War, while serving as a member of the Zouave infantry regiment. Camus lived in poor conditions during his childhood in the Belcourt section of Algiers. In 1923, he was accepted into the lyce and eventually to the University of Algiers. However, he contracted tuberculosis in 1930, which put an end to his football activities (he had been a goalkeeper for the university team) and forced him to make his studies a part-time pursuit. He took odd jobs including private tutor, car parts clerk and work for the Meteorological Institute. He completed his licence de philosophie (BA) in 1935; in May 1936, he successfully presented his thesis on Plotinus, No-Platonisme et Pense Chrtienne, for his diplme d'tudes suprieures (roughly equivalent to an M.A. by thesis). 

Camus joined the French Communist Party in the Spring of 1935 seeing it as a way to "fight inequalities between Europeans and 'natives' in Algeria", he did not suggest he was a Marxist or that he had read Das Kapital, but did write that "[w]e might see communism as a springboard and asceticism that prepares the ground for more spiritual activities". In 1936, the independence-minded Algerian Communist Party (PCA) was founded. Camus joined the activities of the Algerian People's Party (Le Parti du Peuple Algrien), which got him into trouble with his Communist party comrades. As a result, he was denounced as a Trotskyite and expelled from the party in 1937. Camus went on to be associated with the French anarchist movement. The anarchist Andre Prudhommeaux first introduced him at a meeting in 1948 of the Cercle des Etudiants Anarchistes (Anarchist Student Circle) as a sympathiser who was familiar with anarchist thought. Camus went on to write for anarchist publications such as Le Libertaire, La rvolution Proletarienne and Solidaridad Obrera (the organ of the anarcho-syndicalist CNT). Camus also stood with the anarchists when they expressed support for the uprising of 1953 in East Germany. He again stood with the anarchists in 1956, first with the workers uprising in Poznan, Poland, and then later in the year with the Hungarian Revolution. 

In 1934, he married Simone Hie, a morphine addict, but the marriage ended as a consequence of infidelities on both sides. In 1935, he founded Thtre du Travail "Worker's Theatre" (renamed Thtre de l'Equipe ("Team's Theatre") in 1937), which survived until 1939. From 1937 to 1939 he wrote for a socialist paper, Alger-Rpublicain, and his work included an account of the peasants who lived in Kabylie in poor conditions, which apparently cost him his job. From 1939 to 1940, he briefly wrote for a similar paper, Soir-Republicain. He was rejected by the French army because of his tuberculosis.

In 1940, Camus married Francine Faure, a pianist and mathematician. Although he loved Francine, he had argued passionately against the institution of marriage, dismissing it as unnatural. Even after Francine gave birth to twins, Catherine and Jean, on 5 September 1945, he continued to joke wearily to friends that he was not cut out for marriage. Camus conducted numerous affairs, particularly an irregular and eventually public affair with the Spanish-born actress Maria Casares. In the same year Camus began to work for Paris-Soir magazine. In the first stage of World War II, the so-called Phony War stage, Camus was a pacifist. However, he was in Paris to witness how the Wehrmacht took over. On 15 December 1941, Camus witnessed the execution of Gabriel Pri, an event that Camus later said crystallized his revolt against the Germans. Afterwards he moved to Bordeaux alongside the rest of the staff of Paris-Soir. In the same year he finished his first books, The Stranger and The Myth of Sisyphus. He returned briefly to Oran, Algeria in 1942.

During the war Camus joined the French Resistance cell Combat, which published an underground newspaper of the same name. This group worked against the Nazis, and in it Camus assumed the nom de guerre "Beauchard". Camus became the paper's editor in 1943, and when the Allies liberated Paris, Camus reported on the last of the fighting. He was, however, one of the few French editors to publicly express opposition to the use of the atomic bomb in Hiroshima soon after the event on 8 August 1945. He eventually resigned from Combat in 1947, when it became a commercial paper. It was then that Camus became acquainted with Jean-Paul Sartre.

After the war, Camus began frequenting the Caf de Flore on the Boulevard Saint-Germain in Paris with Sartre and others. Camus also toured the United States to lecture about French thinking. Although he leaned left politically, his strong criticisms of Communist doctrine did not win him any friends in the Communist parties and eventually also alienated Sartre. 

In 1949 his tuberculosis returned and he lived in seclusion for two years. In 1951 he published The Rebel, a philosophical analysis of rebellion and revolution which made clear his rejection of communism. The book upset many of his colleagues and contemporaries in France and led to the final split with Sartre. The dour reception depressed him and he began instead to translate plays.

Camus' first significant contribution to philosophy was his idea of the absurd, the result of our desire for clarity and meaning within a world and condition that offers neither, which he explained in The Myth of Sisyphus and incorporated into many of his other works, such as The Stranger and The Plague. Despite the split from his "study partner," Sartre, some still argue that Camus falls into the existentialist camp. However, he rejected that label himself in his essay Enigma and elsewhere (see: The Lyrical and Critical Essays of Albert Camus). The current confusion may still arise as many recent applications of existentialism have much in common with many of Camus' practical ideas (see: Resistance, Rebellion, and Death). However, the personal understanding he had of the world (e.g. "a benign indifference", in The Stranger), and every vision he had for its progress (i.e. vanquishing the "adolescent furies" of history and society, in The Rebel) undoubtedly sets him apart.

In the 1950s Camus devoted his efforts to human rights. In 1952 he resigned from his work for UNESCO when the UN accepted Spain as a member under the leadership of General Franco. In 1953 he criticized Soviet methods to crush a workers' strike in East Berlin. In 1956 he protested against similar methods in Poland (protests in Pozna) and the Soviet repression of the Hungarian revolution in October. 



He maintained his pacifism and resistance to capital punishment anywhere in the world. One of his most significant contributions to the movement against capital punishment was an essay collaboration with Arthur Koestler, the writer, intellectual and founder of the League Against Capital Punishment.



When the Algerian War began in 1954 it presented a moral dilemma for Camus. He identified with pied-noirs, and defended the French government on the grounds that the revolt in Algeria was really an integral part of the 'new Arab imperialism' led by Egypt and an 'anti-Western' offensive orchestrated by Russia to 'encircle Europe' and 'isolate the United States'. Although favouring greater Algerian autonomy or even federation, though not full-scale independence, he believed that the pied-noirs and Arabs could co-exist. During the war he advocated civil truce that would spare the civilians, which was rejected by both sides who regarded it as foolish. Behind the scenes, he began to work for imprisoned Algerians who faced the death penalty. 

From 1955 to 1956 Camus wrote for L'Express. In 1957 he was awarded the Nobel Prize in literature "for his important literary production, which with clear-sighted earnestness illuminates the problems of the human conscience in our times.", officially not for his novel The Fall, published the previous year, but for his writings against capital punishment in the essay Rflexions sur la Guillotine. When he spoke to students at the University of Stockholm, he defended his apparent inactivity in the Algerian question and stated that he was worried about what might happen to his mother, who still lived in Algeria. This led to further ostracism by French left-wing intellectuals.

In 1949 Camus founded the Group for International Liaisons in the Revolutionary Union Movement. With George Orwell, he opposed totalitarian regimes in the East and the West.

As he wrote in L'Homme rvolt (in the chapter about "The Thought on Midday") he was a follower of the ancient Greek 'Solar Tradition' (la pense solaire). So, not only he was the leader of the French resistance movement "Combat" but he also set up in 1947-8 the Revolutionary Union Movement (Groupes de liaison internationale - GLI) which was formed in 1949 and can be described as a trade union movement in the context of revolutionary syndicalism (Syndicalisme rvolutionnaire). For more, see the book : Alfred Rosmer et le mouvement rvolutionnaire internationale by Christian Gras).

His colleagues were Nicolas Lazarvitch, Louis Mercier, Roger Lapeyre, Paul Chauvet, Auguste Largentier, Jean de Bo (see the article: "Nicolas Lazarvitch, Itinraire d'un syndicaliste rvolutionnaire" by Sylvain Boulouque in the review Communisme, n 61, 2000). His main aim was to express the positive side of Surrealism and Existentialism, rejecting the negativity and the nihilism of Andr Breton and Jean-Paul Sartre.

In 1944 Camus founded the "French Committee for the European Federation" (Comit Franais pour la Fderation Europene -CFFE) declaring that Europe "can only evolve along the path of economic progress, democracy and peace if the nation states become a federation".

From 1943, Albert Camus had correspondence with Altiero Spinelli who founded the European Federalist Movement in Milan (see Ventotene Manifesto and the book "Unire l'Europa, superare gli stati", Altiero Spinelli nel Partito d'Azione del Nord Italia e in Francia dal 1944 al 1945-annexed a letter by Altiero Spinelli to Albert Camus).

In 22-25 March 1945, the first conference of the European Federalist Movement was organised in Paris with the participation of Albert Camus, George Orwell, Emmanuel Mounier, Lewis Mumford, Andr Philip, Daniel Mayer, Franois Bondy and Altiero Spinelli (see the book "The Biography of Europe" by Pan Drakopoulos). This specific branch of the European Federalist Movement disintegrated in 1957 after the domination of Winston Churchill's ideas about the European integration.

Three essays by Dr. Miho Takashima in the International Journal of Humanities ("Revolt and Equilibrium: A Comparative Study of Nineteen Eighty-Four and L'Homme Rvolt, the Views and Struggles of Orwell and Camus", "Art and Representation: A Comparative Study of George Orwell and Albert Camus on their Literary Works", and "George Orwell and Albert Camus: A Comparative Study Their Views and Dilemmas in the Politics of the 1930s and 40s") explore the relation between the work of the French writer Albert Camus and the English writer George Orwell.

Takashima argues that Orwellperhaps intentionally, in order to warn the intellectual elitecompromised with "Big Brother", while Camus confronted with The Plague. This is observed not only in the comparison between Nineteen Eighty-Four and The Rebel but, especially, in Camus' play The State of Siege. This theatrical play was written together with the novel The Plague and the essay The Rebel. It is the work whichaccording to Camus himselfrepresents him best and is a response to George Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four. The hero, Diego, opposes the totalitarian dictator named Plague, and dies in order to set a Spanish town free from the Inquisition.

The State of Siege is a work against totalitarianism, written in the same epoch when Camus' idol, George Orwell, wrote Nineteen Eighty-Four. The play includes an allegorical reference to the end of Orwell's novel.

The original title of The State of Siege was The Holy Inquisition in Cadix. In the French edition of the book, Camus has included an essay under the title "Why Spain?". In this polemical text, he answers his Catholic friend Gabriel Marcel who criticized him for setting the plot in Spain. Here Camus expresses his opposition to the totalitarian regimes of the West, and to the behavior of the Vatican and the Pope during World War II. The most important phrase of this essay is "Why Guernica, Gabriel Marcel?".

Camus died on 4 January 1960 in an automobile accident near Sens, in a place named "Le Grand Fossard" in the small town of Villeblevin. In his coat pocket lay an unused train ticket. It is possible that he had planned to travel by train, but decided to go by car instead.The driver of the Facel Vega car, Michel Gallimard his publisher and close friend also perished in the accident. Camus was interred in the Lourmarin Cemetery, Lourmarin, Vaucluse, Provence-Alpes-Cte d'Azur, France. 

He was survived by his twin children, Catherine and Jean, who hold the copyrights to his work.

After his death, two of Camus' works were published posthumously. The first, entitled A Happy Death published in 1970, featured a character named Meursault, as in The Stranger, but there is some debate as to the relationship between the two stories. The second posthumous publication was an unfinished novel, The First Man, that Camus was writing before he died. The novel was an autobiographical work about his childhood in Algeria and was published in 1995.

Many writers have written on the Absurd, each with his or her own interpretation of what the Absurd actually is and their own ideas on the importance of the Absurd. For example, Sartre recognizes the absurdity of individual experience, while Kierkegaard explains that the absurdity of certain religious truths prevent us from reaching God rationally. Camus was not the originator of Absurdism and regretted the continued reference to him as a philosopher of the absurd. He shows less and less interest in the Absurd shortly after publishing ''Le Mythe de Sisyphe'' (''The Myth of Sisyphus''). To distinguish Camus' ideas of the Absurd from those of other philosophers, people sometimes refer to the Paradox of the Absurd, when referring to Camus' Absurd.

His early thoughts on the Absurd appeared in his first collection of essays, L'Envers et l'endroit (The Two Sides Of The Coin) in 1937. Absurd themes appeared with more sophistication in his second collection of essays, Noces (Nuptials), in 1938. In these essays Camus does not offer a philosophical account of the Absurd, or even a definition; rather he reflects on the experience of the Absurd. In 1942 he published the story of a man living an Absurd life as ''L'tranger'' (''The Stranger''), and in the same year released ''Le Mythe de Sisyphe'' (''The Myth of Sisyphus''), a literary essay on the Absurd. He had also written a play about a Roman Emperor, Caligula, pursuing an Absurd logic. However, the play was not performed until 1945. The turning point in Camus' attitude to the Absurd occurs in a collection of four letters to an anonymous German friend, written between July 1943 and July 1944. The first was published in the Revue Libre in 1943, the second in the Cahiers de Libration in 1944, and the third in the newspaper Liberts, in 1945. All four letters have been published as Lettres un ami allemand (Letters to a German Friend) in 1945, and have appeared in the collection Resistance, Rebellion, and Death.

In his essays Camus presented the reader with dualisms: happiness and sadness, dark and light, life and death, etc. His aim was to emphasize the fact that happiness is fleeting and that the human condition is one of mortality. He did this not to be morbid, but to reflect a greater appreciation for life and happiness. In Le Mythe, this dualism becomes a paradox: We value our lives and existence so greatly, but at the same time we know we will eventually die, and ultimately our endeavours are meaningless. While we can live with a dualism (I can accept periods of unhappiness, because I know I will also experience happiness to come), we cannot live with the paradox (I think my life is of great importance, but I also think it is meaningless). In Le Mythe, Camus was interested in how we experience the Absurd and how we live with it. Our life must have meaning for us to value it. If we accept that life has no meaning and therefore no value, should we kill ourselves?

Meursault, the Absurdist hero of L'tranger, is a murderer who is executed for his crime. Caligula ends up admitting his Absurd logic was wrong and is killed by an assassination he has deliberately brought about. However, while Camus possibly suggests that Caligula's Absurd reasoning is wrong, the play's anti-hero does get the last word, as the author similarly exalts Meursault's final moments.

Camus' understanding of the Absurd promotes public debate; his various offerings entice us to think about the Absurd and offer our own contribution. Concepts such as cooperation, joint effort and solidarity are of key importance to Camus. 

Camus made a significant contribution to a viewpoint of the Absurd, and always rejected nihilism as a valid response. "If nothing had any meaning, you would be right. But there is something that still has a meaning." Second Letter to a German Friend, December 1943.

What still had meaning for Camus is that despite humans being subjects in an indifferent and "absurd" universe, in which meaning is challenged by the fact that we all die, meaning can be created, however provisionally and unstably, by our own decisions and interpretations.

Throughout his life, Camus spoke out against and actively opposed totalitarianism in its many forms. Early on, Camus was active within the French Resistance to the German occupation of France during World War II, even directing the famous Resistance journal, Combat. On the French collaboration with Nazi occupiers he wrote:

Camus' well-known falling out with Sartre is linked to this opposition to totalitarianism. Camus detected a reflexive totalitarianism in the mass politics espoused by Sartre in the name of radical Marxism. This was apparent in his work L'Homme Rvolt (The Rebel) which not only was an assault on the Soviet police state, but also questioned the very nature of mass revolutionary politics. Camus continued to speak out against the atrocities of the Soviet Union, a sentiment captured in his 1957 speech, The Blood of the Hungarians, commemorating the anniversary of the 1956 Hungarian Revolution, an uprising crushed in a bloody assault by the Red Army.



In The Stranger, Albert Camus characterizes his justification of the absurd through the experiences of a protagonist who simply does not conform to the system. His inherent honesty disturbs the status quo; Meursault's inability to lie cannot seamlessly integrate him within society and in turn threatens the simple fabrics of human mannerisms expected of a structurally ordered society. Consequently, the punishment for his crime is not decided on the basis of murder, but rather for the startling indifference towards his mother's recent death. Even after a conflicting spiritual discussion with a pastor inciting Meursault to consider a possible path towards redemption, the latter still refuses to take upon salvation and symbolizes his ultimatum by embracing the "gentle indifference of the world"; an act which only furthers his solidarity with a society incapable of realizing his seemingly inhumane and misanthropic behavior.

The plague is an undeniable part of life. As posited in The Plague, it is omnipresent, just like death was always an impeding factor in The Stranger. Albert Camus once again questions the meaning of the moral concepts justifying humanity and human suffering within a religious framework. For Camus, the rationale behind Christian doctrine is useless; as mortal beings, we cannot successfully rationalize the impending and inescapable death sentence forced upon every human. The plague, which befalls upon Oran, is a concrete and tangible facilitator of death. Ultimately, the plague enables people to understand that their individual suffering is meaningless. As the epidemic "evolves" within the seasons, so do the citizens of Oran, who instead of willfully giving up to a disease they have no control over, decide to fight against their impending death, thus unwillingly creating optimism in the midst of hopelessness. This is where Camus channels his thoughts behind the importance of solidarity: although the plague is still primarily an agent of death, it provides the uncanny opportunity for people to realize that individual suffering is absurd. In the midst of complete suffering, the challenging response adopted by the majority of the citizens of Oran demonstrates an inexplicable humanistic connection between distraught and distant characters. Only by taking the choice to fight an irreversible epidemic are people able to create the ever-lacking meaning to a life destined for execution the moment of its creation.

Camus was once asked by his friend Charles Poncet which he preferred, football or the theatre. Camus is said to have replied, "Football, without hesitation."

Camus played as goalkeeper for Racing Universitaire Algerios (RUA won both the North African Champions Cup and the North African Cup twice each in the 1930s) junior team from 192830. The sense of team spirit, fraternity, and common purpose appealed to Camus enormously. In match reports Camus would often attract positive comment for playing with passion and courage. Any aspirations in football disappeared at age 17, upon contracting tuberculosisthen incurable, Camus was bedridden for long and painful periods.

When Camus was asked in the 1950s by an alumni sports magazine for a few words regarding his time with the RUA, his response included the following:

Camus was referring to a sort of simplistic morality he wrote about in his early essays, the principle of sticking up for your friends, of valuing bravery and fair-play. Camus' belief was that political and religious authorities try to confuse us with over-complicated moral systems to make things appear more complex than they really are, potentially to serve their own needs.

Several of Camus' works have been adapted into movies. The Stranger has been adapted into an Italian 1967 movie by Luchino Visconti, and also to a 2001 Turkish adaptation titled Yazgi (Fate) by Zeki Demirkubuz. The Plague was adapted to a 1992 film titled La Peste by Luis Puenzo and set in modern day America.

Quite a few musical artists refer to Camus and his work in their music. The post-punk band The Fall took their name from Camus' novel The Fall. These also include an album by Jeff Martin(Exile and the Kingdom, 2006) and songs by Gentle Giant ("A Cry for Everyone", 1972), The Cure ("Killing an Arab", 1978), Tuxedomoon ("The Stranger", 1979), Digable Planets ("Reachin' (A New Refutation of Time and Space)", 1993) The Magnetic Fields ("I Don't Want To Get Over You", 1999), The Manic Street Preachers ("The Masses Against The Classes", 2000), JJ72 ("Algeria", 2000), Suede ("Obsessions", 2002), Streetlight Manifesto ("Here's To Life", 2003), A Perfect Circle ("A Stranger" and "The Outsider", 2003), Angela McCluskey ("Know it All", 2004), Joanna Newsom ("This Side of the Blue", 2004), Tarkio ("Neapolitan Bridesmaid", 2006), The Independence, ("20-Ought-Almost-Talkin' Blues"), 2008.

Anti-folk singer-songwriter Jeffrey Lewis references Camus, as well as Bob Dylan and Allen Ginsberg, in a 2005 song, "Williamsburg Will Oldham Horror" in the line, "And I'm sure the thing is probably Dylan himself too, stayed up some nights wishing he was as good as Ginsberg or Camus."






























Cystic fibrosis affects 30,000 children and young adults in the US alone
Inhaling the mists of salt water can reduce the pus and infection that fills the airways of cystic fibrosis sufferers, although side effects include a nasty coughing fit and a harsh taste. 
That's the conclusion of two studies published in this week's issue of The New England Journal of Medicine.
They found that inhaling a mist with a salt content of 7 or 9% improved lung function and, in some cases, produced less absenteeism from school or work. 
Cystic fibrosis, a progressive and frequently fatal genetic disease that affects about 30,000 young adults and children in the US alone, is marked by a thickening of the mucus which makes it harder to clear the lungs of debris and bacteria. 
The salt water solution "really opens up a new avenue for approaching patients with cystic fibrosis and how to treat them," says Dr Gail Weinmann, of the US National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, which sponsored one of the studies. 
Mark Elkins of the Royal Prince Alfred Hospital in Sydney, Australia and colleagues authored one of the new published studies.
The team found that the 83 volunteers who regularly inhaled a 7% mist of salty water had fewer breathing problems and less absenteeism from school or work than those who inhaled a solution with a salt content of under 1%. 
"Adding salt [and water] to the airway surfaces of patients with cystic fibrosis is beneficial" for both children and adults, they conclude. 
All of the patients first inhaled a chemical to try to open their lung passages as much as possible.
In the second study, US-based Assistant Profsesor Scott Donaldson of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and his colleagues found that a 7% salt mist "produced a sustained acceleration of mucus clearance and improved lung function" because it helped hydrate the lungs.
In an accompanying editorial, Dr Felix Ratjen of the Hospital for Sick Children in Toronto, Canada, cited several unpleasant side effects of the salt mist treatment including a bad taste, coughing fits and the lengthy 30 minutes it can take to administer. 
He added that in the study by Elkins and team, patients may not have received the best long-term antibiotic treatment. 
That would make the inhaled salt water mist appear more effective than it would have been if people were getting a better drug, says Ratjen. 
Weinmann says limitations inherent to the treatment mean a salt water mist "may be just a first step" in treating cystic fibrosis.

Scientists have rescued a mouse immune system that was overwhelmed by a systemic blood infection. But will this work in humans?
Scientists have discovered how infections that invade the whole body, like malaria, disable the immune system and prevent it from detecting and fighting other microorganisms.
The Australian and German researchers say the discovery may help scientists to develop vaccines that restore immunity in people with systemic or 'whole body' infections. 
They publish their research today online in the journal Nature Immunology.
The immune response is alerted when specialised sentries of the immune system, dendritic cells, detect a virus or bacteria.
They alert the immune system by capturing infected cells and displaying fragments or antigens of the pathogen on their surface in a process called cross-presentation.  
Lead researcher Dr Jose Villadangos, an immunologist from the Walter and Eliza Institute of Medical Research in Melbourne, says systemic infections such as malaria or sepsis, a bacterial infection of the blood, overstimulate dendritic cells.
This results in the immune system's critical alarm system shutting down.
"This doesn't occur in local infections because only a few dendritic cells are involved," Villadangos says.
"But in the case of malaria infections and sepsis, dendritic cells throughout the body are concentrated on alerting the immune system, which prevents them from detecting and responding to any new infections." 
A new type of vaccine?
Villadangos and colleagues managed to restore immunity in mice with an immune system compromised by sepsis.
They injected them with a live vaccine made of dendritic cells that had been exposed to a secondary virus in the laboratory, and subsequently displayed antigens of that virus. 
Villadangos says the findings show the missing link in the immunosupressed animal is the capacity of the dendritic cells to display the antigens of new viruses. 
"We should be able to take dendritic cells from a patient with sepsis or malaria and expose them to antigens of the virus of a secondary infection and inject them back into the patient.
"This strategy is already being used in the development of anti-cancer vaccines. We are yet to find out if will work against secondary infections in humans with a systemic infection," Villadangos says.

Scientists will analyse the contents of this capsule for clues about how the solar system began
A seven-year quest to return to Earth pristine samples from the solar system's formation ended in triumph in a dark and wet Utah desert at the weekend. 
"It's hard to describe what it feels like to be at this point of the mission," University of Washington researcher and lead scientist of the Stardust mission Professor Don Brownlee said shortly after the probe's touchdown at 10:10 UTC (21:10 AEDT) on Sunday. 
"We travelled almost 3 billion miles in space. We visited a comet, grabbed a piece of it and it landed here this morning," Brownlee said. "It's an incredible thrill." 
Stardust released its precious cargo during a high-speed flyby of Earth, sending the tyre-sized canister soaring through space at a blazing speed of about 46,000 kilometres per hour when it smashed into the planet's atmosphere.
This makes it the fastest human-made object, topping the record set in May 1969 by the returning Apollo 10 command module. 
As its heat-shield fried away, a comet-like plume formed in its wake, looking like a torch that was visible in parts of the western US. 
"We weren't quite sure how bright it was going to be and some people didn't think we would see anything," says Brownlee, who slipped outside the Utah base with some of his team members to try to spot the capsule's streak across the sky. 
After scanning the sky for several minutes, Brownlee finally found an object that he said looked like Mars, but was clearly not where Mars was at the time. 
"It was twinkling a little bit, getting a little brighter, and moving. I thought, maybe that's a helicopter. But it kept getting brighter and brighter and brighter," he says. 
The object was reddish in colour and trailed a bright, glowing plume behind it, Brownlee says.
"It's ironic, you have a comet mission that ends producing a comet." 
Collecting spacedust
During its time in space, Stardust passed by Comet Wild-2 (Vilt-2) and extended a gel-filled collecting device to trap some particles to take back to Earth. It also collected bits of interstellar dust. 
Scientists believe comets contain unaltered material that was used to form the solar system. 
"We did this mission to collect the most primitive materials we could in the solar system," Brownlee says.
"We went to a comet that formed at the edge of the solar system, far from the Sun under very cold conditions. We're confident that it was made out of the initial building blocks of our solar system." 
The capsule was retrieved by helicopter crews and taken to a clean room on the Utah Test and Training Range for inspection.
The canister containing the samples is scheduled to be removed from the capsule and flown to the NASA Space Center in Houston on Tuesday. 
There, scientists will catalogue the samples and begin distributing them to teams for analysis.

Gotcha! A colourful, striking image can spark your interest
Internet users can take just one-twentieth of a second to decide whether they like the look of a website, new research has found.
"Visual appeal can be assessed within 50 milliseconds, suggesting that web designers have about 50 milliseconds to make a good impression," the Canadian researchers report in the March/April issue of the journal Behaviour & Information Technology.
Dr Gitte Lindgaard and colleagues from Carleton University in Ottawa confirm that internet users are a fickle lot.
The team did this by flashing up websites for 50 milliseconds and asking participants to rate them for visual appeal.
When they repeated the exercise after a longer viewing period the ratings were consistent.
The medium is the message
The finding comes as bad news to anyone hoping to convey information, says Sue Burgess, an Australian researcher who evaluates website useability and senior lecturer in information management at the University of Technology Sydney.
"There's no doubt that people do respond very quickly to websites and decide very quickly whether to stay on them," she says.
The appeal of a website is usually tied to colour, movement and interactivity, she says, with the way the information is structured coming second.
Burgess says it's unclear whether the internet is changing our ability to concentrate for long periods our if we are adapting to the medium.
"There's so much information and there's always going to be a lot of clicking around just to see what's there," she says.
The halo effect
Australian associate professor of psychology Bill von Hippel, from the University of New South Wales, says it takes about 50 milliseconds to read one word, making this a "stunningly remarkable" timeframe in which to process the complex stimuli on a website.
"It's quite remarkable that people do it that fast and that it holds up in their later judgement," he says.
"This may be because we have an affective or emotional system that [works] independently of our cognitive system."
In evolutionary terms, this ability helped us respond rapidly to dangerous situations, he says.
The study also reflects the so-called halo effect, von Hippel says, where an initial bias towards something drives subsequent judgements.
"This suggests that we make very quick judgements based on some sort of emotional reaction and our more considered judgements still reflect that first impression."

Jewish people's history and migrations are reflected in their DNA, a new study shows
Four Jewish mothers who lived 1000 years ago in Europe are the ancestors of 40% of all Ashkenazi Jews alive today, international researchers report.
The DNA study paints a vivid picture of human evolution and survival, and correlates with the well-established written and oral histories of Jewish migrations, says Dr Doron Behar of the Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, who worked on the study. 
The study, published in the American Journal of Human Genetics, suggests that some 3.5 million Jews alive today descended from four women. 
For their study, Behar and scientists from Europe and the US sampled DNA from 11,452 people from 67 populations.
"All subjects reported the birthplace of their mothers, grandmothers, and, in most cases, great-grandmothers," the scientists write. 
They looked at mitochondrial DNA, which is found in cells, outside the nucleus and away from the DNA that carries most genetic instructions.
Mitochondrial DNA is passed down virtually unchanged from mother to daughter, but it does occasionally mutate, at a known rate. 
Researchers can use this molecular clock to track genetic changes through time.
They used it, for instance, to compute when the "ancestral Eve" of all living humans lived: in Africa, about 180,000 years ago. 
Now they have found four ancestral Jewish mothers. 
"I think there was some kind of genetic pool that was in the Near East," Behar says.
"Among this genetic pool there were four maternal lineages, four real women, that carried the exact specific mitochondrial DNA markers that we can find in mitochondrial DNA today." 
Settling Europe
They, or their direct descendants, moved into Europe. 
"Then at a certain period, most probably in the 13th century, simply by demographic matters, they started to expand dramatically," Behar says. 
"Maybe it was because of Jewish tradition, the structure of the family that might have been characterised by a high number of children."
But these four families gave rise to much of the population of European Jews, which exploded from 30,000 people in the 13th century to "something like 9 million just prior to World War II", Behar says.
The Nazis and their allies killed 6 million Jews during the war, but there are now an estimated 8 million Ashkenazi Jews, defined by their common northern and central European ancestry, cultural traditions and Yiddish language. 
Behar says as they sampled people from Ashkenazi communities around the world, the same mitochondrial genetic markers kept popping up.
They did not find the markers in most of the non-Jewish people they sampled, and only a very few were shared with Jews of other origin.
Ancestry not genetic disease
This particular study does not provide a direct explanation for some of the inherited diseases that disproportionately affect Jews of European descent, such as breast and colon cancer, because most diseases are caused by mutations in nuclear DNA, not the DNA studied by Behar's group. 
These genes are believed to date from a 'bottleneck' phenomenon, when populations were squeezed down from large to small and then expanded again.
Behar and Skorecki's team have found what is known as a 'founder effect', when one or a small number of people have a huge number of descendants.

Scientists hope to gain an insight into the secret life of clouds with Australia's biggest climate experiment
International storm chasers gathering in Australia this week will release more than 1000 weather balloons over the next month as part of the nation's largest meteorological study.
The Tropical Warm Pool International Cloud Experiment, based in Darwin, will provide the world's most comprehensive set of data about the behaviour of thunderclouds, says Dr Peter May, a principal research scientist at the Australian Bureau of Meteorology in Melbourne.
May says the study will give scientists better ways of modelling cloud behaviour, resulting in more accurate short-term weather forecasting and better predictions for long-term climate change.
"The biggest uncertainty in climate forecasts and greenhouse calculations comes down to our understanding of thunderstorms," he says.
"The underlying aim of this experiment is to increase our understanding of thunderstorms themselves, how they evolve and the large scale impact they have."
Collaborators in the project include the bureau, the US Department of Energy Atmospheric Radiation Measurement Program, the CSIRO, NASA and universities from Australia, the US, Europe, Canada and Japan.
Measuring ice crystals
May says the tropical weather conditions in Darwin, which was devastated by Cyclone Tracy in 1974, provide a natural laboratory for storm watchers.
And this is the time of year for tropical storms, when Darwin has its monsoon-like 'wet' season.
The multi-million dollar study will have three prongs. 
May says research planes will fly directly into the clouds to measure ice crystals while a ground-based network will use radars, laser and infrared systems to look at cloud characteristics and the movement of heat, moisture and light.
And weather balloons will be released every three hours over 23 days from five sites around Darwin.
"This data set is going to be a real resource for the whole meteorological community," May says.
"It'll be the data set that people go to develop new model systems for the next 20 years. There will be dozens, if not hundreds of papers written about this experiment."
May says the link between climate change and global storm patterns is unclear.
But he says it's unlikely that climate change is directly responsible for isolated events, like Hurricane Katrina that struck New Orleans last year.
"The question isn't is a particular storm due to climate change, the question is are we loading the dice so that we can expect more storms or will they be more intense," he says.

Artists think Pluto looks like this. But we won't know for certain until NASA's New Horizons spacecraft, due to launch this week, reaches the distant planet in about a decade
The US space agency is set to shed light on Pluto with the launch of the New Horizons spacecraft this week.
The spacecraft, which is due to be launched at 05:24 AEDT on Wednesday (18:24 UTC, Tuesday) will also investigate a new class of planet-like objects, called ice dwarfs, that exist beyond the orbit of Neptune.
Over the decades, NASA has launched probe after probe for close-up studies of Earth's sister planets. But distant Pluto has remained shrouded in mystery, with only a few fuzzy telescope pictures for scientists to ponder. 
"What we know about Pluto today could fit on the back of postage stamp," says Dr Colleen Hartman, NASA's deputy associate administrator for science.
And New Horizon's principal investigator Dr Alan Stern, with the Southwest Research Institute in Boulder, Colorado, agrees we have much to learn about the history of these distant objects.
"These are objects that were growing to planethood, but something stopped that process of growth mid-gestation," he says. "It left us these fossil relics." 
Pluto is the largest and best-known object in the Kuiper Belt region of the solar system.
Like comets, the planetary bodies in the Kuiper Belt region are so far from the Sun that scientists believe they still contain some of the original material that was used to form the solar system. 
How the universe formed
New Horizons is a U$700 million (A$928 million) attempt to learn more about how the universe formed.
The piano-sized spacecraft contains seven science instruments to map Pluto, its largest moon Charon, and two other recently discovered smaller moons, as well as other Kuiper Belt objects. 
To shave as much time as possible from the journey to Pluto, which will take more than nine years, NASA is launching New Horizons aboard a massive rocket typically used for communications satellites five to 10 times heftier than the half-tonne science probe. 
The launch vehicle, an Atlas 5 rocket with two upper-stage motors and an unprecedented five solid-rocket strap-on boosters for extra punch, has successfully flown six previous missions.
The rocket was rolled out from its hangar to its Cape Canaveral launch pad earlier this week.
Even with the 58,000 kilometre per hour boost into space, New Horizons will still need to bounce off Jupiter's massive gravity field and travel for nearly a decade to reach Pluto. 
Hitching a ride
If the probe cannot be launched by 2 Feburary it will miss the opportunity to slingshot off Jupiter and take an additional three to five years to reach Pluto, depending on the actual launch date. 
Scientists, who already have waited decades for NASA to approve and fund a mission to Pluto, are happy to at last be on their way. 
"This is a place where nature operates at vastly different temperatures and conditions than we're familiar with on Earth," says New Horizons co-investigator Professor Richard Binzel with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
"We're poised to begin the exploration of a new world," adds Dr Dale Cruikshank, with the NASA Ames Research Center in California.

Backpackers form a highly mobile community, says a researcher who's developing a new communication device especially for them
Backpackers may one day use a mobile travel assistant to ring home and network with other travellers while finding out the cost of a bus ticket to Bondi Beach, an Australian researcher says.
The digital travel buddy would also act as a travel guide with information about the best places to go and how to get there, says Jeff Axup, a PhD student at the University of Queensland and former backpacker.
Axup has been studying backpacker culture and communication as part of his research into the technology needs of so-called mobile communities.
"A lot of research focuses too much on the technology and tries to find an application," he says.
"We like to look at how people naturally act and try to come up with technology to fit their needs."
In a recent study Axup shadowed a group of backpackers and documented their behaviour as they toured Brisbane, took a boat cruise and visited an animal park.
The results of his study are published on the ePrintsUQ website and will be submitted for publication in coming weeks.
Axup's latest research includes prototypes of the technology, which is being developed with the Australasian CRC for Interaction Design.
The final product will probably be software-based so backpackers can download it onto their mobile phones, he says.
And it will be likely to include instant messaging and discussion forums, or use wireless technology.
Mobile communities
Axup says backpackers are cultural symbols of an increasingly mobile world, a change brought about by improved transport and technology and the breakdown of the traditional neighbourhood.
"One term to describe this is glocalisation, where you still have your local communities but they've gone global and they may be distributed," he says.
Backpackers already use mobile phones, text messaging and the internet but Axup's research shows that they are driving changes in technology as much as the technology is changing the nature of travel.
"Any time you introduce new technology it always enters an existing social and technological environment, so it will of course change the existing environment," he says.
"But then people will take it and use it in ways that were never expected and maybe even change the technology."

Watching a comedy is as good for the heart as aerobic exercise, new research suggests
Watching a comedy film boosts the flow of blood to the heart, but watching a sad film makes the flow decline, a US study shows.
University of Maryland researchers asked 20 young people to watch movie segments lasting 15 to 30 minutes, taken from comedy films and serious films, with at least 48 hours between the two sessions. 
With the help of ultrasound, the researchers measured the study participants' blood flow through the brachial artery.
This vessel runs between the shoulder to the elbow and its blood flow is thought to be a good indicator of blood flow around the body.
Blood flow was reduced in 14 of the 20 volunteers when they watched extracts such as the distressful opening scenes to Saving Private Ryan.
But blood flow rose in 19 out of 20 when they watched funny clips, such as scenes from Something About Mary. 
The difference between the two flows was more than 50%, according to the study, which appears today in the journal Heart. 
Watching a sad movie has about the same effect on heart flow as remembering an angry incident or doing mental arithmetic, it says. 
But watching a comedy is equivalent to a bout of aerobic exercise or starting a course of cholesterol-busting statin drugs. 
Depression, anxiety, hostility and anger are already known to impair nitric oxide pathways that help blood vessels to dilate. 
The authors tentatively suggest that a chuckle may stimulate selected hormones to have the opposite effect. 
"Positive emotions such as mirthful laughter [may] have a [beneficial] effect on the endothelium," the cells that line the walls of the blood circulation system, they speculate.

Why did the turtle cross the road? Because it wanted lunch
Scientists are studying the wandering ways of Australia's eastern long-necked turtle to see if can learn to cross the road.
Professor Arthur Georges, director of the applied ecology research group at the University of Canberra, says it's the first time researchers have documented how roads affect the turtles.
Georges says unlike other turtles, Chelodina longicollis has evolved the ability to take long overland hikes because it prefers ephemeral waters, such as temporary swamps and pools.
"When a wetland dries, the nutrients are released from the sediment and when it refills there's a flush of production, so they're capitalising on all the insects and other foods that benefit from that flush," he says.
The hardy creatures gravitate to permanent waters in a drought, where they can  'switch off' growth and reproduction, sometimes for as long as seven years. They then hit the road as soon as the rains come.
Georges and his team are studying a population of turtles in Jervis Bay in southern New South Wales and hope to have some results ready for publication in the middle of the year.
Look right, look left, look right again
Georges says the long-necked turtle is familiar with its environment and may even have learnt to avoid roads.
"What we have found is that they use the Sun and an internal clock to navigate and they know landscape really well so they tend to beeline to various places," he says.
"We're going to take them from the wetlands and release them near a road and observe their behaviour as they approach the road. They may have an aversion to [it] and turn around."
But if the road safety message hasn't sunk in it may be necessary to build tunnels under roads to provide them with safe passage, he says.
While it appears that some aspects of development have got in the way of the turtle's natural behaviour, it hasn't been all bad for the long-necked turtle, Georges says.
"When you fly over [surrounding farmland] you'll see there are lots of dams," he says.
"Each one is full of about 20-30 turtles, and those sorts of water bodies weren't there before," he says.
"But on the downside, when a road runs through a wetland you can increase the chance that over time the population will decline."

Landslides like this one in Pakistan earlier this week may become more common if climate change increases rainfall, scientists say
Heavier rainfall as a result of climate change could loosen soils making landslides more common, UN experts say.
This may risk hillside slums in Latin America to antiquities in Egypt's Valley of the Kings, according to scientists meeting in Tokyo this week to discuss ways to prevent and ease damage from landslides.
"If climate change predictions are accurate you will expect more intense and extreme rainfalls," says Professor Srikantha Herath, senior academic officer of the UN University. 
A report released at the time of the meeting says some cultural sites are at risk from landslides, including the Valley of the Kings where Egypt's Pharaohs are buried, the Inca mountain fortress of Machu Picchu in Peru and China's Huaqing Palace dating from the Tang dynasty. 
"Special attention should be given to cultural and natural heritage sites of universal and irreplaceable values," says Professor Kyoji Sassa, director of the Disaster Prevention Research Institute at Japan's Kyoto University.
"In some places, particularly in developing countries, the natural threats are being exacerbated by rapid tourism development," he says.  
Early warning
Herath says the Tokyo talks are likely to call for better monitoring and early warning systems, special protection of cultural sites, better preparedness and quick aid for victims. 
He says it is impossible to say if global warming is already causing more landslides. 
Of natural disasters, landslides are the seventh biggest killer behind droughts, storms, floods, earthquakes, volcanoes and extreme temperatures, according to the report for the UN University, Kyoto University and UNESCO.
Among severe landslides, about 2800 died in Cholima in Honduras in 1973 and almost 1200 in northern Italy in 1963.
The Louvain University database on which the figures are based often excludes landslides triggered by earthquakes. 
Unstable hillsides
In many poor nations, many people were forced to live on unstable hillsides, away from flat plains exploited for farming. 
"Late arrivals are always settling in the most dangerous land," says Professor Janos Bogardi, director of the UN University Institute for Environment and Human Security. 
He says that better building codes and simply giving out information about the risks of mudslides could save lives.
Asia suffered most with 220 landslides in the past century out of about 500 that caused human deaths, the scientists say. Many of the most deadly mudslides were in Latin America and the costliest in Europe. 
About 800-1000 people died in landslides in each of the past 20 years, the UN University says.

The wind may carry legionnaires bacteria from cooling towers much further than once thought, scientists say
The bacteria responsible for causing legionnaires disease can spread through the air up to 6 kilometres from its source, French researchers report. 
Legionella pneumophila likes to live in hot water, such as in industrial cooling towers or the water systems of large buildings where it can then cause pneumonia-like infections.
Now a new study suggests that a wider area may be at risk. 
Past studies found airborne legionella spread only a few hundred metres, says lead author Dr Tran Minh Nhu Nguyen, currently at the National Public Health Institute in Helsinki.
If other investigators confirm the new findings, he says "a number of regulations and guidelines related to this environmental health risk should be revised accordingly".
In the Journal of Infectious Diseases, Nguyen and his team report on their investigation of a 2004 outbreak of legionnaires disease that occurred in Pas-de-Calais in northern France. 
They identify a contaminated cooling tower at a petrochemical plant as the source of the outbreak, which killed 21 of the 86 people with laboratory-confirmed infection.
Most of the victims lived within 6 kilometres of the plant, although one lived 12 kilometres away. 
The fatality rate is "striking" when compared with past community-acquired outbreaks, in which fatality rates were 1 to 11%, the researchers note.
They think the strain of legionella involved could have been unusually virulent. 
The outbreak occurred in two peaks, the first ending after the cooling tower had been shut down and the second beginning during cleaning of the tower and peaking once it had reopened. 
The pattern suggests that high-pressure cleaning methods used to decontaminate the towers contributed to the bacteria's spread.
"There are measures and guidelines for managing cooling towers contaminated with legionella," Nguyen says. "However, how well they have been adopted and implemented depends on the individual country and setting."

Map collector Liu Gang speaks in Beijing in front of a slide of a map which is said to be an 18th century copy of the 1418 original and showing the Americas in unusual detail
A Chinese map collector has found a copy of an ancient map he claims proves controversial theories that a famed Chinese mariner was the first to sail to the Americas and circumnavigate the world. 
Liu Gang says the map supports recent theories that Chinese people sailed to America before Christopher Columbus and charted parts of the world such as Antartica and northern Canada long before Western explorers. 
"The map shows us that Chinese discovered the world 70 years before Columbus," Liu said in a public unveiling of the chart. "The map tells us that [mariner] Zheng He discovered the world."
The map is dated to 1763 but is also clearly marked that it is a copy of a map made in 1418. That date coincides with Zheng He's voyages, from 1405 to 1432. 
Liu bought the map for about US$500 (A$666) from a map collector in Shanghai in 2001, but only realised its importance after he read Gavin Menzies' best-selling book 1421: The Year China Discovered The World. 
In the book Menzies theorises that previously undiscovered world maps drawn up by Zheng He's admirals were copied by European map makers and were extensively used during the voyages of great Western explorers, including Columbus, Ferdinand Magellan, Vasco Da Gama and James Cook. 
Much of Menzies' theories are supported by his knowledge of ocean currents, continental trade winds and star navigation that he learned during his life as a British naval commander. 
Despite its prominence on best-seller lists, many historians have criticised Menzies' theories for the lack of accompanying evidence. 
China's Ming Dynasty banned ocean-going exploration and trade on pain of death after Zheng He's final voyage, largely due to the death of Emperor Zhu Di, who sponsored the voyages. 
The huge costs of Zheng's fleets, which often numbered hundreds of ships, were another factor. 
The Chinese records of Zheng He's voyages have largely been lost, either purposely destroyed as part of the ban on ocean-going navigation or due to a fire that ravaged Beijing's imperial palace in the 1420s. 
Liu believes a lot of the records still exist, but Chinese scholars have largely ignored them. 
"I sincerely believe that other maps exist and books exist [that contain evidence of Zheng He's world travels] but no-one has been paying attention to them," Liu says. "It is my purpose to try to wake these [scholars] up."

The new fridge magnets will be aware of others on the fridge and communicate with them
Fridge magnets may one day be able to fix bad grammar and change the words to something they think is more appropriate.
"The idea is that each magnet is aware of the other magnets on the fridge and they transmit information between each other," says Australian digital artist Pierre Proske.
Proske is working with researchers at the Future Applications Lab of the Viktoria Institute in Sweden to develop the intelligent fridge magnets.
Details will be presented at the  International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces in Sydney later this month.
Each fridge magnet consists of 16-character liquid crystal display, rather than a magnetic strip with a printed word, Proske says.
The magnets can randomly generate a word, categorise that word (as a noun, verb, adjective or adverb) and transmit the category to any words they are placed next to.
As you compose a poem, placing words in grammatical order, the magnets communicate with each other to learn the grammar rules you are using.
Once they are 'trained', the magnets can change the words they are displaying to substitute words that don't fit the established grammar rules, like an autocorrect function.
"So the actual word that's associated with each magnet can change depending on the way in which it's aligned," says Proske.
Reshuffling gives you a new word
Luckily if you don't like the word the magnet substitutes, you can always take the magnet off the fridge and shake it to reshuffle and get a new word.
And the plan is for you to be able to reset the magnets completely so they forget all their grammar rules.
Of course, the magnets rely on being taught good grammar in the first place.
"Someone could instil bad grammar if they wanted to," says Proske.
But he doesn't want to take all the fun for those kitchen-based party-goers that like making up crazy sentences on fridges.
He says the system will only worry about which words can be immediately next to each other and won't be too strict about the grammar of the sentence as a whole.
"This was deliberate to keep the sentences a little more poetic," says Proske.
"The idea is it is still fridge poetry. We don't want to create sentences that make total sense." 
Changing words to fit themes
The team also hopes that the magnets will be able to substitute words in response to stimuli other than bad grammar.
For example, someone might have a set of magnets on the home fridge and a set of magnets on the work fridge that can communicate via wireless internet, says Proske.
If the magnets at home read, for example, "Crazy kangaroos dream wildly", those at work might change to "Drunk wallabies laze around the pool", in keeping with the Australian theme.
The team also suggest it might be interesting to apply their ideas to Scrabble and crosswords but says further details on this are a subject for further investigation.
Proske and colleagues have so far half developed a prototype intelligent fridge poetry magnet system and are hoping to get more ideas at the Sydney conference.
And they're not just interested in generating another product for the consumer market.
This is a "whimsical and accessible" way to contribute to the study of developing intelligent robots, says Proske.

The findings could explain the traditional job of men as society's enforcers, say researchers
Men are likely to take pleasure when they see someone punished for acting unfairly, while women are likely to feel badly for the culprit, say neuroscientists.
Dr Tania Singer of University College London and team report their findings today online ahead of print publication in the journal Nature.
In a two-phase experiment, the researchers recruited 32 male and female volunteers, as well as four others who were undercover actors hired to play the role of volunteers. 
In the first part of the experiment, the group played a game of mutual investment in which they had to give money to one of their number.
The recipient decided how much to give back from the profits. They could hand back up to triple the investment, at little reward to themselves, or hand back little or nothing, maximising their own gains at the investor's cost.
One actor was cast in a generous role, always giving lots of money back to their partners, while another actor was cast as a meanie, giving back very little and sometimes nothing at all.
Body language by the volunteers, confirmed later in questionnaires, confirmed that they did not like the actors who had cheated on them.
"Fair" players, in contrast, were rated as more agreeable, more likeable and, remarkably, more attractive.
Brain imaging reveals sex differences
In the second phase, the same volunteers were each placed in a magnetic resonance imaging scanner, a device which shows blood flows within the brain. 
The volunteer was then given a demonstration of a mild shock, the equivalent of short bee-sting, and then watched as the actors, standing next to the scanner, got the same painful treatment. 
When a "fair" actor received a shock, the scanner showed empathy among all the volunteers. 
In males and females alike, the images showed activation of the anterior insula/fronto-insular cortex (AI/FI) and anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). Previous research has showed that these parts of the brain cause the feeling of  distress when one sees someone else in pain.
When an "unfair" actor got a shock, the AI/FI and ACC lit up again among most female volunteers. But amongst the men these empathic areas showed no increase in activity. 
Reward centre activated in men
Men who watched "unfair" actors suffering did show an activation of their nucleus accumbens, the part of the brain associated with the satisfaction of reward. This activation was not seen in most female volunteers.
Singer says the results show that fairness in social situations "shapes the nature of the emotional link we have to other people. 
"We empathise with others if they cooperate and act fairly. But in contrast, selfish and unfair behaviour compromises this empathic link," she says. 
Singer believes these fundamental responses at the individual level have played a key role in social evolution. 
They would explain for instance why communities everywhere draw up laws or codes to punish or sideline those who cheat and freeload on the majority, she says.
As for the gender difference about punishing a social offender, Singer says she could not rule out the possibility that the experiment favoured men as there was a physical rather than psychological or financial threat involved.
Despite this limitation, she says, the results could explain the traditional job of men as society's enforcers.
"This investigation would seem to indicate there is a predominant role for men in maintaining justice and issuing punishment," she says.

Remote peoples can describe and understand geometrical concepts related to circles, triangles and parallel lines, scientists show. So, is geometry hard-wired in the brain?
Amazonian hunter-gatherers who lack written language and who have never seen a maths book do well on basic geometry tests, researchers say in a study that suggests geometry may be hard-wired into the brain.
Adults and children alike showed a clear grasp of concepts such as where the centre of a circle is and the logical extension of a straight line.
This was despite not having words for these concepts, the researchers report today in the journal Science. 
Professor Stanislas Dehaene of the College de France in Paris and colleagues tested 14 children and 30 adults of an Amazonian group called the Munduruku, and compared their findings to tests of US adults and children. 
"Munduruku children and adults spontaneously made use of basic geometric concepts such as points, lines, parallelism, or right angles to detect intruders in simple pictures, and they used distance, angle, and sense relationships in geometrical maps to locate hidden objects," they write. 
"Our results provide evidence for geometrical intuitions in the absence of schooling, experience with graphic symbols or maps, or a rich language of geometrical terms." 
Geometry is an ancient field and Dehaene's team postulated that it may spring from innate abilities. 
"Many of its propositions -- that two points determine a line, or that three orthogonal axes localize a point -- are judged to be self-evident and yet have been questioned on the basis of logical argument, physical theory, or experiment," the researchers write. 
There was no way the Munduruku could have learned these ideas, they add. 
"Most of the children and adults who took part in our experiments inhabit scattered, isolated villages and have little or no schooling, rulers, compasses, or maps," they write. 
"Furthermore, the Munduruku language has few words dedicated to arithmetical, geometrical, or spatial concepts, although a variety of metaphors are spontaneously used." 
Playing by the rules
They designed arrays of six images, each of which contained five conforming to a geometric concept and one that violated it.
"The participants were asked, in their language, to point to the weird or ugly one," the researchers write. 
"All participants, even those aged 6, performed well above the chance level of 16.6%."
The average score was nearly 67% correct, identical to the score for US children. 
"The spontaneous understanding of geometrical concepts and maps by this remote human community provides evidence that core geometrical knowledge, like basic arithmetic, is a universal constituent of the human mind," they conclude.

Soil harbours bacteria that contain antibiotic resistance genes. So is this where hospital superbugs get their protective genes from?
Bacteria in dirt may be 'born' with a resistance to antibiotics, which could help shed light on the problem of drug-defying superbugs, Canadian researchers say.
They tested hundreds of different bacteria found in soil and discovered that every one had some resistance to antibiotics, meaning they had evolved a mechanism for evading the effects of the drugs. 
The findings, published today in the journal Science, could help to explain why bacteria so quickly develop resistance to antibiotics, and why drug companies must constantly develop new ones. 
"It explains where these things come from in the first place," says Dr Gerry Wright, of Ontario's McMaster University.
"This work could prove to be extremely valuable to the drug development process." 
Wright's team dug up 480 strains of streptomyces bacteria and tested them for resistance to various antibiotics. 
"Without exception, every strain was found to be multi-drug resistant to seven or eight antibiotics on average, with two strains being resistant to 15 of 21 drugs," the scientists write. 
A logical place to start
These particular bacteria do not infect people, but Wright believes the findings almost certainly apply to other species of microbes. 
"It turns out that streptomyces make lots of antibiotics," Wright says. "Anything that ends in 'mycin' comes from streptomycin: vancomycin, streptomycin." 
That was why they chose this group of bacteria. 
"We were curious to see where these things might come from in the first place, so it seemed that was a logical place to start. I expect lots of these [drug-resistant] genes are peppered all over the microbial community," Wright says. 
The scientists exposed the bacteria to known antibiotics and then searched for genes that were activated when the microbes survived. 
"We found old mechanisms and new mechanisms," Wright says. 
"We found a brand-new resistance mechanism to an antibiotic called telithromycin," he says, referring to Aventis' drug Ketek, which has only recently been approved in some countries. 
Ketek was designed to overcome resistance to antibiotics, but one of the bacteria Wright tested evolved a way to prevent it from working. 
Developing resistance
Almost as soon as penicillin was introduced in the 1940s, bacteria began to develop resistance to its effects, prompting researchers to develop many new generations of antibiotics. 
But their overuse and misuse have helped fuel the rise of drug-resistant superbugs.
The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention says 70% of infections that people get while in the hospital are resistant to at least one antibiotic. 
Wright says his findings do not get doctors off the hook. He says they still must prescribe antibiotics only when they are needed, and stress to patients the need to use them properly. 
Soil bacteria live in a constant kind of arms race, making antibiotics to protect themselves against other bacteria, and then evolving antibiotic resistance to evade the antibiotics made by other bacteria. 
"Their coping tactics may be able to give us a glimpse into the future of clinical resistance to antibiotics," Wright says.

Nanoparticles may rescue us from the drudgery of cleaning the bathroom
Cleaning bathrooms could become a chore of the past with new coatings on bench surfaces, tiles and glass that do the job for you, say Australian researchers.
Professor Rose Amal of the ARC Centre for Functional Nanomaterials and team are developing new coatings they hope will be useful for self-cleaning surfaces in homes and hospitals. 
"If you can have self-cleaning materials, you can do the job properly without having to use disinfectants and other chemicals," says Amal, based at the University of New South Wales in Sydney.
Tiny particles of titanium dioxide up to 20 nanometres in diameter are currently used on outdoor surfaces, such as self-cleaning windows.
These titanium dioxide nanoparticles absorb UVA light, ultraviolet light below 380 nanometres in wavelength.
This excites electrons and gives the particles an oxidising ability more powerful than chlorine bleach. 
The nanoparticles can then kill microbes and break down organic compounds from vehicle and industrial emissions into carbon dioxide and water.
Surfaces coated with the titanium dioxide nanoparticles also have another property, called 'superhydrophilicity' that helps them self-clean. This is when water does not form droplets, but rather runs straight off the surface, washing as it goes.
Changing the activating light
But titanium dioxide can only be activated by UVA and this is only present in sunlight, not other sources of light, like indoor light. 
This means that to date self-cleaning coatings have been limited to outdoor surfaces.
Amal and team have been modifying titanium dioxide nanoparticles so they can absorb light at higher wavelengths, in the visible spectrum, over 400 nanometres in wavelength.
They have been doping titanium dioxide nanoparticles with a small amounts of other elements such as iron or nitrogen, in place of titanium or oxygen.
Lab trials show that glass coated with the new nanoparticles can be activated by visible light from a lamp to kill bacteria Escherichia coli, and degrade volatile organic compounds.
"If you can coat it onto a shower room, you don't have to clean the shower room that often," says Amal. "Because of the oxidising properties, fungus will also not grow on the surface."
Outdoor coatings could benefit too
While Amal says the self-cleaning coatings would be useful on tiles, glass screens and benches in bathrooms and hospitals, she says the nanoparticles could also be used to improve outdoor self-cleaning surfaces.
UVA only makes up 5% of sunlight, she says, whereas the ability to use visible light would significantly increase the amount of sunlight that could be used.
"If you use this material outdoors you can utilise more of the sunlight wavelengths," she says.
Funding so far has been through the Australian Research Council but Amal says her team will be looking for commercial support down the track.
She expects it will be another year before the nanoparticles will be ready for large-scale production.
Safety considerations
Amal says recent concerns about the toxicity of nanoparticles should not apply to those in the self-cleaning coatings because they are chemically glued to surfaces with polyethylene glycol, and so are not free to float in the air.
"For this particular application I don't think it should be a problem," she says.

A long tailfin or 'sword' scares off competitors and impresses the ladies
Colourful aquarium fish known as swordtails, size up competitors' tailfins before fighting, US scientists show.
Often a male just has to show his big elongated tail, which looks like a pointy sword, to scare off challengers, according to a new study in the latest issue of the journal Animal Behaviour. 
Yet another study in the same publication concludes that female swordtails prefer male swordtails with big, striped swords. 
Researchers even think the female fixation on these bright appendages led to their emergence in the first place, since female fondness for novel traits and bright colours appears to have preceded the appearance of male swords. 
The finding suggests the creation of some secondary sexual characteristics may be influenced, and even controlled, by the opposite sex. For male swordtails, this characteristic is an extension of the tail or caudal fin.
"It is not terribly rigid and cannot be manipulated very efficiently," says Dr Kari Benson, who co-authored the first paper with Dr Alexandra Basolo. "It is not useful as a weapon. It is only used as a visual signal in a fight."
Benson, a researcher at Lynchburg College, says, "The sword might signal many things: how strong and vigorous he is, how well he ate while growing up or simply by indicating that he is large." 
The researchers staged duels between swordtails (Xiphophorus helleri), by putting two comparably sized males with different-sized swords in a tank and then observing their interactions, which usually involved aggressive behaviour, such as chasing and biting. 
The researchers then artificially manipulated sword size by affixing fake plastic swords to the fish. 
Repeatedly, the male with the bigger sword won. Often all he had to do was to show his sword and then the other male slunk away.
Basolo, from the University of Nebraska, says the loser really looks the part. 
"His body darkens, due to a stress response, he puts his head down and he then positions himself at the periphery of the tank," she says, adding that the loser even folds in his fins. 
Dr Brian Trainor, a researcher in the College of Social and Behavioral Sciences at Ohio State University, says:
"One part I was a bit amazed with was that in the sword manipulation experiment; somehow the fish were able to determine their own artificial sword sizes.
"I think people usually think that fish are not too bright. Not only were these swordtails able to assess their competitors' apparent sword length, but also they were able to compare that with their own sword length. I thought that was a cool result." 
He even believes there is a swordtail-human link, since both species seem to have evolved traits and behaviours that do not offer apparent survival benefits. 
The sword, for example, appears to be useless, save for its visual impact. For humans, he says possible examples include artistic abilities and senses of humour. 
Like male fish showing off their swords to females, he suggested that these human abilities might exist, in part, to impress members of the opposite sex.
Like the fish swords, they can also weed out competitors who may not be as talented or humourous. 
"Our studies in swordtails show that sexually selected traits can be complex and used in multiple behavioural contexts, much like many aspects of human behaviour," he says.

This hourglass-shaped crater on Mars provides more evidence that glaciers once carved the planet's surface, glaciers made from fallen snow
Mysterious debris fields found far from the poles on Mars were made by glaciers, possibly formed just like glaciers are on Earth, by the build-up of snow, researchers say.
The glaciers would have resembled those found on Earth in places such as Mount Kilimanjaro in Africa or the Andean peaks in South America, the researchers report in the latest issue issue of the journal Science. 
They probably formed when Mars was tilted on its side 5 million years ago, Brown University planetary geologist Professor James Head and colleagues say. 
Researchers were intrigued when spacecraft data showed curious rock-strewn deposits at the foot of some Martian volcanoes and mountains close to the equator. 
These scraped-up piles of rock and sand in certain valleys and along the western flanks of the three giant volcanoes look like what is left behind by a moving glacier on Earth. 
It is now very cold and very dry on the Mars surface, and water cannot stand in any one place on the planet for long, even as ice. 
Researchers have speculated whether the tropical glaciers came from snow or perhaps oozed up from underground. 
An ancient climate
The team of US and French researchers ran climate simulations that suggest glaciers could have formed when the Sun heated up the poles, sending snow there into the atmosphere and allowing it to fall elsewhere on the planet. 
The models predict locations for these glaciers that match many of the glacier remnants seen today. 
"What we found was that the glaciers were formed from snow brought from the polar regions," Head says. 
They note that Mars often has changed its tilt so that the poles face the Sun and the equator gets only oblique sunlight. 
"Actually, it last occurred only five-and-a-half million years ago," says Dr Francois Forget of the University of Paris, who led the team. 
Sublime, say researchers
The Sun's rays could vapourise the snow in a process known as sublimation, also seen here on Earth.
Winds would carry the water vapour south, up and over the soaring slopes of the Tharsis Montes volcanoes and the giant Olympus Mons volcano. 
The vapour would cool and condense into snow, which would eventually harden into an icy glacier. 
"The findings are important because they tell us that Mars has experienced big climate changes in the past, the kinds of climate change that led to the Great Ice Age here on Earth," Head says. 
"The findings are also interesting because this precipitation pattern may have left pockets of ice scattered across Mars. This is good information for NASA as officials plan future space missions, particularly with astronauts."

And the AM goes to Dr Karl, for promoting greater understanding of the application of science to daily living
Dr Karl Kruszelnicki, the man responsible for demystifying belly button lint, has been awarded an Australia Day Honour for his work as a science communicator.
Dr Karl's appointment as a Member of the Order of Australia (AM) is the latest in a long list of accolades for the former scientist, engineer and paediatric emergency doctor, including a 2002 Ig Nobel Prize for his belly button lint research.
Kruszelnicki, who describes himself as "very mediocre as a scientist but pretty good at talking about it" says his real achievements have been in making a difference to people's lives.
He tells the story of a woman who told him at a book signing that her son, once a high school drop-out and surf bum, decided to become a geneticist after listening to him on Triple J radio.
The boy got himself a PhD and is working as a geneticist at Harvard University today.
"Under circumstances like that I feel that I have done my work," Kruszelnicki says.
"I used to be a medical doctor and I didn't realise it at the time, but the reason I was doing it was to liberate people from what ails them or to help them get to the next stage, like a conduit.
"So I think that's what [the AM] is for. Alternately it might be for my groundbreaking work on belly fluff."
The secret history of Dr Karl
Kruszelnicki was born in Sweden, across the river from Elsinore where Hamlet trod the corridors of his castle in Shakespeare's play.
At school he was teased for having a weird surname and he grew up to work in a variety of jobs including physicist, labourer, roadie and TV weatherman.
Today he's a popular media personality and a best-selling author.
Ask about the least known fact about him besides his middle name (it's Sven), and he tells you that he test-drives four-wheel drives and is an avid autograph collector who has the signatures of three of the 12 moon walkers. 
He also subscribes to A$10,000 (US$7500) worth of scientific literature.
Kruszelnicki says the most important scientific discovery is that you can't mix sewage with drinking water, the most over-rated is the internet and the biggest unanswered question is why the Moon is larger on the horizon.
The most way-out theory that may one day become reality?
That one day genetic engineering will allow us to travel through space in the form of a giant magnetic vapour cloud.
"And you'll still be able to have sex," he says.
He's also learning to stand up on his Malibu surfboard. Obviously he'll be applying the most complex laws of physics to the task.
"It's called not falling over," he says.
Other Australia Day Honours recipients include:
&bull; Professor Ian Hickie (AM), clinical advisor beyondblue, for service to medicine in the development of mental health initiatives
&bull; Dr Jeanne Collison (AO), as a pioneer of cardiac bypass techniques through the development of the first Australian heart-lung machine
&bull; Dr Ian Brooker (AM), for services to botany, including research leading to the identification and classification of the genus Eucalyptus; and
&bull; Dr George Bennett (AM), for his work in celestial navigation and positional astronomy.

The Fab Tree Hab weaves together branches to form living archways
Growing a home from living trees instead of building a home from felled timber is the goal of an architect from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
Dr Mitchell Joachim, part of the MIT Media Lab's Smart Cities Group, along with ecological engineer Dr Lara Greden and architect Javier Arbona, propose a home that is actually an ecosystem. 
The Fab Tree Hab goes beyond sustainable housing and so-called green design, building with materials that have a low impact on the environment and human health. 
"Not only does it do zero damage, but it will hopefully clean the air," says Joachim. 
The habitat is based on an ancient gardening method known as pleaching, which weaves together tree branches to form living archways, lattices or screens. 
In Joachim's vision, the exterior of the living house is shaped over the course of several decades into a protective crisscross of vines, interspersed with soil pockets and growing plants. 
A clay and straw composite fills in the gaps to insulate against the cold and heat and keep out moisture. 
He proposes constructing windows manufactured from soy-based plastics that would flex with the home as it grows. 
Gathering water
Water would be gathered in a roof-top trough and circulate by gravity through the house, where it would be used by the inhabitants, filtered through a garden, and purified in a pond containing bacteria, fish, and plants that consume organic waste. A composting system would treat human refuse.
Water would also serve to hydrate the plants and the tree itself, which would give off water vapour naturally during transpiration and cool the shelter. 
The Fab Tree Hab would also rely on the Sun for heat. Large, south-facing windows would absorb warmth in the northern hemisphere's winter, while windows located on the shady side at ground floor would draw in cool breezes during hot months. 
Grow your own furniture
"The living house would be the Holy Grail of this art form," says Richard Reames, an Orgeon-based arborsculptor and author of the book How to Grow a Chair. 
Reames uses grafting and pleaching techniques to grow living chairs, benches and tables. 
Joachim's dream is to plan an entire community based on the living house design, but before that can happen, he will need to conduct a year or two's worth of sociology and feasibility studies. 
In the meantime, he is designing a house in California that will be constructed from 50% recycled and reconstituted materials and 50% living elements. 
The project is called MatScape and Joachim sees it as an experimental step toward the ultimate living house.

Navigating bubble wrap: part of research that may one day help to design space exploration robots
Crayfish don't just blunder around in the dark bouncing off rocks but use a sophisticated sense of touch to form detailed mental images of their surroundings, an Australian researcher says.
Professor David Macmillan of the University of Melbourne has previously piqued the interest of NASA, which has applied his earlier work on the crayfish, or yabby (Cherax destructor), to developing tiny space exploration robots.
Macmillan says just as humans looking for the bathroom in the middle of the night grope around with their hands, yabbies in dark or murky waters use their antennae to orientate themselves.
They also use chemosensory receptors all over their bodies that allow them to detect chemicals in the water from food, mates or predators.
"We're trying to find out how crustaceans work out what their world is like," he says.
Yabbies are not renowned for having large brains, but Macmillan says his research, published in the current issue of the Journal of Experimental Biology, shows the crustaceans have an acute sense of touch that helps them to get around.
"People have made lots of assumptions that they're not that smart and they don't know what's going on out there but increasingly [we're] finding that they actually put together some pretty sophisticated pictures," he says.
Bubble wrap or sandpaper?
In the study Macmillan and colleagues put the crayfish into arenas containing different types of surfaces and structures including bubble wrap and sandpaper.
"Basically we asked the animals to tell us whether they could tell the difference," he says.
"What we're seeing is that they change their behaviour according to the texture of surfaces."
He says his team is the first to demonstrate that yabbies can discriminate between textures.
Crayfish in space
Macmillan's research feeds into the field of biomimetics, where designs found in nature are used in robotics.
A few years ago, he travelled to the US where he met NASA scientists developing miniature, independently moving robots to discuss his work on how yabbies move their tails.
Macmillan has just completed more work suggesting yabbies can analyse particular spaces before they enter them, and can even recognise places they've been before, and other crayfish.
"We now think we've got evidence that they can do very sophisticated analyses on a space before they even get into it, they can detect vibrations and they can remember what they've experienced before," he says.

Pericles probably died of typhoid fever, as did as many as one-third of his fellow Athenians
Modern DNA analysis of ancient dental pulp suggests that typhoid fever caused the plague that helped to end the Golden Age in Athens, scientists say. 
The DNA collected from teeth from an ancient Greek burial site is similar to a modern organism that causes typhoid fever, an infection spread by contaminated food or water. 
"Studying the historical aspects of infectious disease can be a powerful tool for several disciplines to learn from," says Dr Manolis Papagrigorakis of University of Athens, a co-author of the study published in the International Journal of Infectious Diseases.
"We believe this report to be of outstanding importance for many scientific fields, since it sheds light on one of the most debated enigmas in medical history." 
Up to one-third of Athenians are thought to have died from the plague that spread to Greece from Ethiopia, Egypt and Libya in 430-426 BC. 
Several diseases including smallpox, bubonic plague, anthrax and measles have been suggested as the cause of the plague, one of whose most prominent victims was the Athenian Golden Age leader Pericles. 
The plague is thought to have changed the balance of power between Athens and Sparta, ending Athenian dominance.
The scientists describe how they extracted DNA from a mass burial pit in a cemetery dating back to the time the plague struck Greece. 
Papagrigorakis and his team say the DNA sequences resembled Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi, the organism that causes typhoid fever.

How much old research is based on fraud? Details are emerging about the latest case, which involves papers in three medical journals
A Norwegian mouth cancer specialist has admitted to fabricating research data published in several international scientific magazines, in the latest fraud case to rock the medical research world. 
A doctor at the Institute for Cancer Research at the Norwegian Radium Hospital, Dr Jon Sudb&oslash;, has confessed to forging data used to document research published last October in The Lancet as well as in two other articles. 
The revelation comes on the heels of the disclosure that South Korea's celebrated cloning pioneer Professor Hwang Woo-Suk had faked research papers claiming breakthroughs in stem cell research. 
Suspicion that Sudb&oslash;, 44, had forged data in The Lancet article surfaced earlier this month and several investigations have been launched into his conduct. 
"He has indicated that in addition to the article in The Lancet, two of his other articles contained information in which the conclusions have no basis," says Sudb&oslash;'s lawyer Erling Lyngtveit. 
The two other articles appeared in the New England Journal of Medicine in April 2004 and the Journal of Clinical Oncology in March 2005. 
"It appears that he started cheating a little bit, and then the deception got completely out of control in his last article in The Lancet," the lawyer adds. 
Made-up study
In The Lancet article, the doctor maintained that anti-inflammatory drugs like aspirin were efficient in preventing mouth cancer, but they also increased the risk of cardiovascular disease. 
He based this conclusion on data from 908 fictitious patients, 205 of whom had been given the same date of birth. 
"This had nothing to do with money," Lyngtveit insists. 
"In different circumstances, his motives would be perceived as positive since they are what helps research to move forward: the desire to contribute to something, the yearning for fame and glory," he says, adding however that "this got completely out of hand". 
In Sudb&oslash;'s article in the New England Journal of Medicine, he claimed that the resection of the first cancerous cells in the oral cavity did not have an impact on the mortality rate in patients. 
According to his lawyer, he now admits he did not have the mortality statistics to back up that claim. 
Sudb&oslash;'s article in the Journal of Clinical Oncology meanwhile discussed the possibility of calculating which heavy smokers would contract mouth cancer. 
He has now admitted that he had only taken blood tests from some of the patients, and not all of them as previously claimed, to check if they had continued smoking, Lyngtveit says. 
Over the past decade, Sudb&oslash; has published 38 articles in international scientific magazines, but his lawyer insists that "the forgery only occurred in three articles". 
"Sudb&oslash; acted alone. His co-authors contributed to the articles in good faith," he adds. 
The case has contributed to further weakening faith in research published in scientific reviews after the widely publicised Hwang scandal. 
In 2005 Hwang claimed to have derived 11 stem cell lines tailored to specific patients, which are believed to have the potential to reduce the risk of rejection of new organs. In 2004, he said he had derived a stem cell from a human embryo. 
But after a month-long probe, a panel of experts from Seoul National University found that Hwang had created no stem cells of any kind and that his research data was fabricated. 
US research journal Science retracted Hwang's papers last week. 
The Lancet meanwhile stated on its website earlier this week that "pending clarification, we now issue an expression of concern about the article by Sudb&oslash;".

Alkaloids found in magic mushrooms act on the brain to produce changes in perception and hallucinations
An Australian researcher has developed a new test for mushrooms that produces a glowing light if they contain the hallucinogenic ingredients that make them 'magic'. 
Several species of magic mushroom grow in Australia, mainly in New South Wales, Victoria and South Australia. 
Nicole Anastos, who did the research for her PhD at Deakin University, describes her work in the latest issue of the Journal of Forensic Sciences.
She applied the method to three species of magic mushroom Psilocybe subaeruginosa, Hypholoma aurantiaca and Panaeolina foenisecii, provided by the Royal Botanic Gardens Melbourne.
The technique uses chemiluminescence, a light reaction that occurs when two chemicals react, to detect psilocybin and its metabolite psilocin. These are the serotonin-like psychoactive ingredients in magic mushrooms.
Magic happens
Not all molecules exhibit chemiluminescence. But mix psilocin with acidic potassium permanganate and psilocybin with ruthenium and magic happens.
Anastos says the technique can detect extremely low levels of psilocin, making it the most sensitive test there is and the first time chemiluminescence has been applied to magic mushrooms.
"In the literature there's quite a few pieces published on the analysis of psilocin and psilocybin in magic mushrooms but the analysis time is quite long in some of them," she says.
"We wanted a rapid method to detect these alkaloids. To date it's the most sensitive method published."
Anastos soaked ground up samples of mushroom in methanol and separated the chemical components using high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) before running the chemoluminescence test.
A do-it-yourself test kit?
Anastos says she hopes her research will be picked up and developed for use by the police.
It could possibly also form the basis of a home magic-mushroom test kit or a urine test, she says.
Associate Professor Michael Dawson, head of chemistry, materials and forensic sciences at the University of Technology Sydney says Anastos' work is interesting chemistry.
But he says it doesn't offer any real advantage over existing tests.
Mass spectrometry or ultra violet absorption produced equally good results when testing for psilocin and psilocybin in magic mushrooms, he says.
"Once you've separated the mixture into its individual components there's a whole host of detection methods."

Vikings are continuing to surprise us. They didn't have horned helmets, as this image suggests. And now it seems they filed their teeth, possibly as a status symbol
Viking warriors filed deep grooves in their teeth, and they probably  had to smile broadly to show them off, according to new finds in four major Viking Age cemeteries in Sweden. 
Caroline Arcini of Sweden's National Heritage Board and colleagues analysed 557 skeletons of men, women and children from 800 to 1050 AD. 
She discovered that 22 of the men bore deep, horizontal grooves across the upper front teeth.
"The marks are traces of deliberate dental modifications they are so well-made that most likely they were filed by a person of great skill," Arcini writes in the American Journal of Physical Anthropology, a journal of the American Association of Physical Anthropologists.
Traces of teeth mutilation have been found in all parts of the world except Europe, with the practice reaching its peak from 700 to 1400 AD, during the height of the Viking Age.
The Vikings were the first Europeans to have displayed this custom, perhaps because they picked it up during their travels.
"This discovery is important as it shows that signs of cultural contact may happen between people over vast distances," Arcini says.
However, the reason for and the importance of the furrows remain mysteries.
"The only things that the people have in common are that they were men and that majority had died when they were quite young. The filed furrows were made in more or less the same area of the teeth in all individuals," Arcini says.
The marks were cut deep into the enamel and occurred often in pairs or triplets.
"To show their furrows, the individuals would have had to smile quite broadly," Arcini says.
The researcher speculates that the marks could have been some sort of decoration or a badge to indicate class or military rank.
"Maybe they were warriors, although no skeletal injuries have been detected," Arcini says.
A status symbol? 
Pia Bennike, at the University of Copenhagen's biological anthropology laboratory, agrees:
"They did it on purpose, to mark that they belonged to a special group. Or maybe they were slaves. This is a very unique and interesting find."
One hypothesis is that they could show an individual's ability to resist pain. They could have also represented some kind of achievement.
"Maybe this is the explanation for multiple furrows or deeper ones," Arcini says.
The tools that the Vikings used for handicrafts were made both of iron and stone. An experiment on a medieval tooth showed that with a lot of force and a file of steel, it takes about 20 minutes to cut a mark like the those of the Vikings in the enamel.
"How long it took on a living person is really difficult to know. Even if the filing did not hurt, it most certainly must have been unpleasant," Arcini says.

The new planet may look like this, a rocky-icy world circling a red dwarf star
Astronomers have discovered the most Earth-like planet so far, close to the centre of our galaxy.
The international team says the planet's relatively small size and large orbit imply a rocky-icy composition with a thin atmosphere.
The discovery, involving a global network of telescopes and reported in today's issue of the journal Nature, is good news for astronomers searching for planets outside our solar system that may support life.
"This discovery is a strong hint that these lower-mass objects are very common," says lead author Dr Jean-Philippe Beaulieu from the Institut d'Astrophysique de Paris.
The discovery of OGLE-2005-BLG-390Lb also backs current theoretical models of planetary formation, the scientists say.
These models predict finding planets the size of Earth to Neptune orbiting red dwarf stars, small cool stars, between one and 10 times the distance from the Earth to our Sun.
The new planet has mass more than five times that of Earth and orbits a red dwarf at more than two-and-a-half times the distance between the Earth and the Sun.
This makes it the first relatively small extrasolar planet discovered not huddled close to its parent star.
The planet is about 28,000 light years away, near the centre of the Milky Way, and was discovered using a technique astronomers say is better at finding smaller planets.
Hunting for extrasolar planets
Most extrasolar planets discovered have been 'hot Jupiters' or gas giant planets in small orbits, detected by the gravitational 'wobble' they induce in the parent star.
"That technique is sensitive to massive planets orbiting nearby stars. But the microlensing method can detect much smaller planets orbiting at larger distances around distant stars," says New Zealand's Dr Michael Albrow from the University of Canterbury.
Albrow is a founding member of the PLANET collaboration, which found the planet, one of the three microlensing collaborations involved from 32 institutions in 12 countries.
Dr Andrew Williams from Australia's Perth Observatory explains how microlensing works.
"The gravity of a dim intervening star acts as a giant natural telescope, magnifying a more distant star, which brightens temporarily. A small 'defect' in the brightening reveals the existence of a planet around the lens star."
Because the chances of exact alignment are very rare, astronomers continuously monitor dense star fields such as the galactic centre, which is best seen from the southern hemisphere.
The Japanese-New Zealand Microlensing Observations in Astrophysics group supplied extra data.
The group happened to be testing the world's largest dedicated microlensing telescope at the time, a 1.8 metre telescope at Mount John University Observatory in Tekapo, New Zealand.

The adult female is just 7.9 millimetres long when sexually mature
The smallest fish in the world has been found lurking in the peat wetlands of Southeast Asia, say scientists.
Dr Maurice Kottelat of the National University of Singapore and team report their discovery online ahead of print publication in the Royal Society journal  Proceedings B.
The record-busting newcomer, Paedocypris progenetica, is skinny and transparent, and a distant cousin of the carp, the researchers say.
The elusive fish lives in highly acid peat swamps on the Indonesian island of Sumatra and in the Malaysian part of Borneo that are threatened by forestry and agriculture. 
The scientists needed a special stereoscopic microscope to accurately measure the fish. 
The smallest adult specimen they netted was a mature female, found in Sumatra, that came to just 7.9 millimetres from nose to tail.
This makes her not only the world's smallest fish but also the world's smallest vertebrate.
She nudged out the previous record holder, a marine fish of the western Pacific called the dwarf goby (Trimmatom nanus), which comes in at 8 millimetres at sexual maturity. 
Kottelat says P. progenetica has "a very rudimentary skull", which leaves the brain exposed.

Maybe he should have had sex
Nervous public speakers should first have penetrative sex to ease the stress, according to a UK study.
But masturbation is unlikely to have the same effect, the study published in the latest issue of the journal Biological Psychology suggests.
Professor Stuart Brody, a psychologist at the University of Paisley, compared the impact of different sexual activities on blood pressure when a person later undergoes a stressful experience. 
Brody asked 24 women and 22 men to keep a diary of their sexual activities for two weeks. 
The volunteers then underwent a stressful ordeal that involved making a speech in public and doing mental arithmetic out loud. 
Volunteers who had had penetrative sex during the previous week or so had the least stress, and their blood pressure returned to normal fastest after their test.
Penetrative sex was far more effective in this regard than masturbation or oral sex.
But those who had abstained completely from any sexual activity had the highest stress levels and blood pressure of all.
Brody also did a psychological profile of the volunteers to see whether they had an anxious or neurotic character, and evaluated their work stress and satisfaction with their partners.
Even when such factors were taken into account, sexual behaviour was clearly the best explanation for the stress responses.
"The effects are not attributable to the short-term relief afforded by orgasm but, rather, endure for at least a week," Brody told New Scientist magazine.
He believes that penetrative sex may release a special 'pair-bonding' hormone called oxytocin, which accounts for the calming effect.

Adding another electrode to this ion engine improves fuel efficiency, tests show, promising faster space travel
A new ion engine that promises to propel spacecraft faster and further is four times more fuel efficient than the best available, scientists say.
They say the results of recent tests suggest the engine, the Dual Stage Four Grid Thruster (DS4G), would reduce the time for craft to reach Mars or Pluto and beyond.
Dr Orson Sutherland and team at the Australian National University's Space Plasma Power and Propulsion Group designed and built the engine with the European Space Agency (ESA).
Sutherland says laboratory tests show the DS4G it is four times more fuel efficient than the best ion engines available and 10 times more fuel efficient than used to propel ESA's SMART-1 Moon mission.
"The underlying technology has been around for 40 years," he says. "All we did with the DS4G is to add some extra components which basically gave it a 10-fold improvement."
Sutherland says missions to Pluto and the Kuiper Belt would be "quite easily" made, with trips out beyond the solar system also more feasible.
"All of that within the working lifetime of a mission scientist," he says.
Another option is the new engine could help take heavier missions to shorter distances such as the Moon or Mars.
How it works
A standard ion engine works by using electrodes to extract ions from plasma, in this case heated xenon gas.
The ions are focused into beams that accelerate through tiny holes in the electrodes and thrust metres out into space, propelling the spacecraft in the opposite direction.

Clusters of magnesium, zinc and copper atoms could be the key to strengthening lightweight metals
An Australian PhD student has taken the first pictures of clusters of metal atoms, which could be the key to tailor-made alloys that are light, strong, durable and flexible.
Peter Liddicoat of the  University of Sydney will present the digital images at a microscopy conference in Sydney next month. 
Liddicoat analysed the atomic structure of a lightweight alloy used in the aerospace industry.
The alloy is made of aluminium, zinc, magnesium and copper heated to 460°C before undergoing a rapid hardening process. 
Hardening involves quenching the alloy in water and then reheating it to 150°C. After 60 seconds at this temperature, the alloy is twice as hard.
Although this hardening process has been used for 50 years, Liddicoat says no one knows how it works.
"Making metal is still a bit of a black art. It's like cooking," he says. "[This work is] just trying to get a bit of science back into it."
Some time ago, his PhD supervisor, Professor Simon Ringer proposed a theory that small clusters of atoms in the alloy could be responsible for the hardening.
And Liddicoat is the first to image them.
First, decompose your alloy
Liddicoat imaged the clusters using strong electromagnetic fields at very low temperatures to 'decompose' the alloy. 
"When you decompose this material you actually rip the atoms off one by one," he says. "It's actually a very delicate process."
A 3D digital image of the alloy and its atoms is then made by computer.
Liddicoat says he is "pretty excited" to have imaged these clusters and the next step is to confirm that these clusters are responsible for the alloy's hardening.
He hopes to work out how the atoms arrange themselves by taking snapshots of the alloy over time.
And he wants to characterise the clusters: the precise combination of atoms that makes them up, the shape of the clusters and how many there are per unit volume of the alloy.
Tailor-made alloys
Liddicoat hopes this will one day make it possible to create materials with specific degrees of flexibility, durability and tensile strength.
"If you understand what they are then you might be able to create the conditions to create these things," he says.

An ancient ancestor of today's crocodiles looks like a cross between an ostrich and a dinosaur
The discovery of a six-foot-long, bipedal and toothless fossil in a museum basement suggests crocodile ancestors looked like some bird-like dinosaurs that lived millions of years later, scientists say.
The crocodile ancestor fossil, found in the basement of New York's American Museum of Natural History, is an example of how similar body types can evolve several times over.
A museum team excavated the 210-million-year-old fossil in the 1940s from the Ghost Ranch Quarry in New Mexico.
This site has produced numerous fossils of Coelophysis, small, carnivorous dinosaurs that lived in the Triassic period. 
As scientists thought Coelophysis was the only vertebrate fossil in the quarry, the crocodile kin sat forgotten in storage and lodged in a slab of rock for nearly 60 years. 
When graduate student Sterling Nesbitt opened the plaster jacket encasing the find in 2005, he saw an articulated fossil that closely resembled bird-like dinosaurs called ornithomimids, or ostrich dinosaurs, that lived 80 million years later. 
Along with Dr Mark Norell, curator of the museum's palaeontology division, Nesbitt reported the finding in the Proceedings of the Royal Society B. 
Part bird, part dinosaur
The creature had large eyes, a beak, a long tail and no teeth. Walking on two feet with its tail erect, it lived at the end of the Triassic with some of the earliest dinosaurs. 
"We don't know what the animal ate because it has a beak, and extant animals with beaks can eat almost anything," says Nesbitt. 
While the skull and the skeleton were almost identical to those of ostrich dinosaurs, the ankle is typical of an ancient group of reptiles called crocodilians, which includes today's crocodiles and alligators. 
The new animal was named Effigia okeeffeae, after the Latin word for ghost, referring to the fact that it was invisible to science for so long. Its name also honours the artist Georgia O'Keeffe, who lived near the quarry. 
"This is one of the most specialised extinct relative of crocodilians yet known, and shows that the 'duck-billed' head that later evolved in ornithomimid dinosaurs first appeared, independently, in crocodilians relatives," says James Clark, associate professor of biology at the George Washington University in Washington DC. 
"This exciting find tells us once again that crocodilians and their relatives were at one time much more diverse than they are today." 
The fossil has also turned a keystone for identifying other close relatives to Effigia, says Norell.
The researchers re-examined some isolated Triassic reptile specimens and noted that Effigia also resembles early theropods, two-legged carnivore dinosaurs. 
They concluded that Effigia-like animals were common in most of the Triassic sediments of western North America. 
This would suggest that creatures like the newly discovered fossil dominated what is now the Americas, and that dinosaur evolution only took off after Effigia went extinct. 
Clark agrees. "The fossil record of the Triassic and Jurassic shows that dinosaur diversity did not take off until after the extinction event at the end of the Triassic, which included large-bodied crocodilian relatives such as aetosaurs, phytosaurs, and rauisuchians, as well as the smaller Effigia," he says.

Cars run on ethanol would make us less dependent on fossil fuels. But does ethanol meet both energy and environmental goals?
Ethanol fuel is more energy-efficient than some experts had realised and it is time to start developing it as an alternative to fossil fuels, researchers say.
While some critics say the push for ethanol is based on faulty science and mostly benefits the farm lobby, several reviews and commentaries published in today's issue of the journal Science argue otherwise. 
"We find that ethanol can, if it is made correctly, contribute significantly to both energy and environmental goals. However, the current way of producing ethanol with corn probably only meets energy goals," says Dr Alexander Farrell at the University of California, Berkeley. 
Farrell and colleagues looked at six studies used to argue for and against the development of ethanol as an energy source.
"One of the main purposes is to explain why the studies found in the literature have such divergent results," Farrell says.
"Some of the studies use what appear to be obsolete data or data whose quality cannot be verified."
Currently, ethanol is not a significant source of fuel, but is blended with petrol. Environmentalists hope it could be developed as a cleaner source of fuel than oil or gas. 
"The 15.5 billion litres of ethanol blended into gasoline in 2004 amounted to about 2% of all gasoline sold by volume and 1.3% of its energy content," the researchers write. 
Pollution and greenhouse gases?
Farrell says it is possible to put ethanol in a car and run it, but making ethanol using current technology is expensive and contributes to pollution and greenhouse gases.
"[The environmental cost] comes entirely from making fertiliser, running the tractors over the farm and operating the biorefinery," Farrell says. 
Better methods now being investigated would use the woody parts of plants, using what is known as cellulosic technology to break down the tough fibres. 
"Ethanol can be, if it's made the right way with cellulosic technology, a really good fuel," says Farrell, an assistant professor of energy and resources. 
"At the moment, cellulosic technology is just too expensive. If that changes, and the technology is developing rapidly, then we might see cellulosic technology enter the commercial market within five years." 
Fuel, food and chemical from biomass
Writing in the same journal, scientists from Imperial College London, Georgia Tech and Oak Ridge National Laboratory in Tennessee say they have teamed up to find ways to make a facility to do that. 
Their facility would make a range of fuels, foods, chemicals, animal feeds, materials, heat and power.
It would use biomass, a collection of renewable plant matter and biological material such as trees, grasses and agricultural crops.
"We're looking at a future for biomass where we use the entire plant and produce a range of different materials from it," says Dr Charlotte Williams of Imperial's chemistry department.
"Before we freeze in the dark, we must prepare to make the transition from nonrenewable carbon resources to renewable bioresources," her team writes. 
An oil industry expert says it is possible.
"Credible studies show that with plausible technology developments, biofuels could supply some 30% of global demand in an environmentally responsible manner without affecting food production," says Professor Steven Koonin, chief scientist for BP in London, writes in a commentary. 
"To realise that goal, so-called advanced biofuels must be developed from dedicated energy crops, separately and distinctly from food."

The diet stresses lashings of meat and limits fruit and vegetables
The high-protein Atkins diet has caused a "life-threatening complication" for a woman who strictly followed the diet, say US doctors.
Dr Tsuh-Yin Chen of Lenox Hill Hospital in New York and team report the case in today's issue of The Lancet.
The Atkins diet stresses lashings of meat, butter and other dairy products - high-fat foods typically limited in classic diets - but cuts potatoes, rice and pasta to negligible levels and greatly limits intake of fruit and vegetables.
The diet's premise is that a carbohydrate-starved body will start to burn up stored fat cells, a process called ketosis. 
Chen and team report seeing a 40-year-old obese woman a month after starting the Atkins diet.
She reported losing 9 kilograms after eating only meat, cheese and salads, supplemented by minerals and vitamins sold by Atkins Nutritionals, the company founded by diet pioneer Robert Atkins in 1989. 
The woman was admitted for emergency treatment, complaining of a shortness of breath, nausea and repeated vomiting that had lasted several days, as well as mild gastric pains.
Urine and blood analysis showed she had severe ketoacidosis, a condition in which dangerously high levels of ketone acids build up in the liver as a result of a depletion of the hormone insulin. 
Ketoacidosis, which is more usually seen among diabetics and victims of starvation, can lead to a coma. 
The patient responded well to rehydration and glucose infusion and left hospital after four days. 
"Our patient had an underlying ketosis caused by the Atkins diet and developed severe ketoacidosis," say the researchers, adding that mild pancreatitis or stomach infection may have contributed to the problem. 
"This problem may become more recognised because this diet is becoming increasingly popular worldwide." 
Diet "not nutritionally balanced"
In a commentary also published in The Lancet, Dr Lyn Steffen and Jennifer Nettleton of the University of Minnesota's School of Public Health blast the Atkins diet as "clearly not nutritionally balanced". 
"Low-carbohydrate diets for weight management are far from healthy, given their association with ketosis, constipation or diarrhoea, halitosis, headache and general fatigue to name a few," they say. 
"These diets also increase the protein load to the kidneys and alter the acid balance of the body, which result in loss of minerals from bone stores, thus compromising bone integrity." 
Steffen and Nettleton add: "Our most important criterion should be indisputable safety, and low-carbohydrate diets currently fall short of this benchmark." 
The Atkins diet builds on a long history of low-carbohydrate diets that reaches into the 19th century. More than 45 million copies of Atkins diet books  have been sold, and the impact of the fad has been far-reaching, elevating meat and "low-carb dishes" over pasta, potatoes and rice. 
Atkins Nutritionals emerged from bankruptcy protection earlier this year, specialising as a company that sells low-carb bars and shakes. 
A US firm that handles the company's relations with the media says it cannot comment on the paper published in The Lancet.

The findings suggest that drinking water might help decrease your sensitivity to pain
Going without a drink can make you more sensitive to pain, a study has found.
Australian pain expert Dr Michael Farrell of the Howard Florey Institute in Melbourne and team report their findings in today's issue of the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
"This is another demonstration of the plasticity of pain responses," he says.
"In this particular instance a mild perturbation of electrolyte levels, which is fundamentally what gives rise to thirst is enough to modify the pain response."
Farrell and team studied the relationship between thirst and pain in 10 people.
The study participants had pressure applied to their thumbs to induce mild pain and were given saline injections to stimulate thirst.
The researchers used a PET or positron emission tomography scan to measure blood flow in the brains before and after.
The results showed that people who were thirsty felt more pain.
Two regions of the brain (the pregenual cingulate and ventral orbitofrontal cortex), which were not turned on by either input alone, lit up suggesting a location where the two sensations were being integrated.
The researchers did not find that pain affected thirst levels, but Farrell says this could be because the participants were not made very thirsty in the first place and any decrease would have been hard to measure.
The logic behind the findings
Farrell says the team had speculated there might be circuits in the brain that allow one sensation to modulate another, which is important from the point of view of survival.
Hunger, thirst, tiredness and pain, for example, don't conveniently happen at the same time, he says, so it's important for the body to prioritise.
He says pain is accentuated because it is more important to survival than mild thirst.
"The sensation with the most immediate implications for survival is pushed to the forefront of attention," says Farrell.
Drinking to cut pain?
Farrell says the findings suggest it could be wise for people who are about to go through a painful experience should drink more water beforehand. 
He says evidence from different types of studies also support this relationship between drinking water and pain.
But could people deliberately use dehydration to maximise pain, say via torture?
Not necessarily, says Farrell.
"We suspect if they got dehydrated enough that the overwhelming sense of thirst would probably make pain less rather than more."
Previous studies in rats have shown that mild thirst makes the animals feel more pain but severe dehydration actually dulls pain, he says.
And he says, this too makes sense from the point of view of survival.
If you were very dehydrated it would pay to suppress pain because it might get in the way of your search for water, he says.
Ethical limitations of the study
Farrell says it would have been too hard on the study participants, who already spent up to three hours on the table, to test whether drinking decreased pain.
"They've got this plastic mask holding their head perfectly still and they've got both arms spread out, one of them with a hypertonic solution going into one vein and the other one getting radioactive isotopes. It would have been intolerable," he says.
And testing whether dehydration would have dulled pain would be similarly tricky ethically, he says.

Relatives of this snail left an unusual evolutionary trail. They may have hitched a ride around the world on the back of migratory birds to form new species on distant islands
The animal kingdom's least-likely island-hopping creatures - land snails - have managed to jump from Europe to the Azores, scientists say.
They then jumped some 9000 kilometres of snail-dissolving ocean to the isolated Tristan da Cunha island group, deep in the South Atlantic.
The remarkable and mysterious dispersal abilities of the land snails, belonging to the Balea genus, have resulted in the evolution of eight new Tristan island species.
It was the snails' genes that gave away their ancestors' immigration patterns, according to a study in the latest issue of the journal Nature. 
Researchers still don't know how the snails made the trip.
One possibility is that a tiny juvenile member of the hermaphroditic snail became stuck in the feathers of a wading bird that was blown off course and ended up on the islands, says Dr Richard Preece, of the University of Cambridge, a co-author on the Nature paper.
"The problem is that these are land snails and they don't like salt, as you well know," says the University of Hawaii's Dr Robert Cowie, a snail researcher who is working on a very similar, but far larger, study on the dispersal history of Pacific land snails.
Salt water pretty much rules out one common way for animals and plants to reach islands: by raft.
In fact, it was Charles Darwin who tested whether self-sealed land snails could survive on logs or other floating debris. In the end, he preferred the idea that birds brought them.
But there is a third possibility, says Cowie. The snails might have flown without birds.
There have been wind tunnel studies of how far juvenile snails from Greek islands can blow in the wind. It has been calculated that small snails can be blown more than 16 kilometres.
"In the Pacific we have even tinier snails," says Cowie. What's more, most of them live in trees, where they could conceivably be caught on a freed leaf during a hurricane and carried for thousands of miles.
"So there's that scenario, which makes it even more possible to imagine flying snails."
To get the present numbers and diversity of snails on the Hawaiian islands, for instance, Cowie and his colleagues figure that they'd only need one snail-carrying, hurricane-driven leaf to reach the islands every 10,000 years.
As for the Tristan da Cunha island snails, it could be birds or storms that brought them there, says Cowie. At present, there is no easy way to find out.

The genetic code of marsupials has been documented for the first time with the sequencing of the opossum genome
The sequencing of the first marsupial genome has allowed researchers to trace the immune system of mammals back to what they've dubbed an ancestral "immune supercomplex".
And the research suggests that the human immune system in its present form is a surprisingly recent innovation, says Australian evolutionary biologist Dr Kathy Belov from the University of Sydney, who led the international team.
The grey short-tailed opossum (Monodelphis domestica), found in South America, is the first marsupial to have its genome sequenced.
The sequencing was done at the Broad Institute in the US and the current research represents the first gene cluster characterised.
Belov and colleagues from Australia, Europe and the US report their research on the region, known as the major histocompatibility complex (MHC), in the journal Plos Biology today.
"The research has helped form a picture of what that region would have looked like in ancestral mammals," Belov says.
That picture shows a central complex of immune genes that have since dispersed and are now scattered around a variety of chromosomes.
A supercomplex of immunity
"We're finding that the opossum has a couple of genes in their MHC which aren't in the MHC of other species, and other species have genes in their MHC which aren't in other species," Belov says.
"By tracing it back we can see that originally there was this big cluster of immune genes and over time those genes have moved out of this central complex.
"It suggests there was one big immune gene supercomplex in a mammalian ancestor.
"It's a bit like a dinosaur in that we only know that it's around from the fossil evidence."
Belov will also examine the MHC in the platypus, the first monotreme, or egg-laying mammal, to have its genome sequenced.
Understanding immune systems will help to conserve vulnerable species, Belov says.
Mammal evolution
It's believed that the first monotreme appeared about 210 million years ago and marsupial and placental mammalian lineages separated around 180 million years ago.
South American and Australian marsupials split about 70 million years ago with the break up of the southern supercontinent Gondwana, and continued to evolve separately.
Today the South American and Australian groups are about as different as humans and mice, Belov says.
Belov says birds and other non-mammals have a relatively simple MHC whereas in placental mammals it is much more complex.
"Marsupial MHC turns out be intermediate," she says.
This suggests that "there's been some major changes [in the human immune system] that have gone on quite recently and they're probably more recent than a lot of people expected".
Comparing marsupials
A project to sequence the genome of Australia's tammar wallaby, being done jointly by the Australian Genome Research Facility and the Human Genome Sequencing Center in the US will complement work on the opossum, says Belov.
Belov also has an Australian Research Council grant to study the MHC in the tammar wallaby.
"If we have the tammar wallaby sequence and the opossum sequence we can pretty much predict the sequences of all the other marsupials", she says.

This person of European descent is most likely to have wet, gooey earwax. Now scientists know why
Geneticists say they know why people from some parts of the world have wet, gooey earwax and others have the dry, flaky stuff.
They describe online today in the journal Nature Genetics how a single gene controls its consistency.
Human earwax is a secretion that traps insects, cleans the ear and prevents the outer parts of the auditory canal from drying out.
But cerumen, to give it its scientific name, has long puzzled researchers, who have debated why different populations have a different consistency.
For example, dry earwax is more common in people from China and other countries in eastern Asia. And people of European or African descent are more likely to have the wet variety.
Dr Koh-ichiro Yoshiura, from Nagasaki University and colleagues say mutations in a single gene hold the key.
By looking at Japanese people with different types of earwax, they identified the gene ABCC11, which codes for a type of cell channel.
This channel acts as a kind of gate to control the flow of molecules, which in turn determines wax type.
A mutation in this gene alters the channel's structure and reduces its activity, affecting the wax consistency.
People who inherit two copies of the mutant gene, one from each parent, have dry earwax. Any other combination gives you goo.
The authors compared the gene with earwax genes from 33 different populations around the world, plotting a time-map of where and when the gene mutated.
They conclude that the change in the channel type first occurred in northeast Asia, a change that then spread throughout Asia, and to Native American and Inuit populations with Asian origins.

Facial tumour disease can leave the face of Australia's carnivorous marsupial looking "like pizza", researcher Anne-Maree Pearse says
The mysterious facial tumour disease ripping through Australia's Tasmanian devil population may be an infectious cancer spread by biting, a researcher says.
Anne-Maree Pearse of Tasmania's Department of Primary Industries, Water and Environment reports in the journal Nature today that the tumour cells are chromosomally identical despite being found in different animals, suggesting the existence of a "rogue cell line".
"The thrust of my theory is that a cell line developed in a cancer in a devil somewhere, some time," she says.
"This cell line became persistent and basically had an existence of its own and is just passing through the population like an epidemic."
Pearse says during fights mutated tumour cells may break away from the ulcerated tumour of a diseased devil and become "transplanted" into a healthy devil, where they form the seed of a new tumour.
"We propose that the disease is transmitted by allograft, whereby an infectious cell line is passed directly between the animals through bites they inflict on one another," she writes.
Facial tumour disease, which first became apparent in the mid 1990s, is now present across more than half of the southern island state and has cut the Tasmanian devil (Sarcophilus harrisii) population in some parts by up to 80%, according to the Tasmanian government.
Genetic bottlenecks
Pearse says devils may be particularly susceptible to the disease because of genetic bottlenecks caused by past population crashes.
The crashes resulted in a loss of genetic diversity, which may have caused a net weakening of the devil's immune defences, she says.
Her colleague Dr Menna Jones, a conservation biologist from the University of Tasmania, says the cell line transmission theory is backed by her own research, done with Rodrigo Hamede, into devil fighting and biting behaviour.
"Given what we know about the ecology and behaviour of devils, if you're going to pick any species that might transmit any pathogen or disease by biting, devils would be a very likely candidate," Jones says.
The theory comes as good news for those involved in combating the disease, she says.
"What's nice about the allograph theory is that it does make disease suppression or disease control simpler," she says.
"If transmission is simply transfer of tumour cells from devil to devil the most effective thing you can do is simply to take sick animals out of the population." 
Jones says the research comes as the Tasmanian government prepares to launch a two-year disease suppression study in the state's southeast following a successful pilot last year.
The study will monitor the impact of isolating an estimated 300-400 devils that live on Tasmania's Forestier and Tasman peninsulas, where the disease hasn't yet established a stronghold. They will be separated from the mainland with devil-proof grates.
Can it spread to humans?
Pearse, who also has a background in human cytogenetics, says studying devil facial tumour will advance understanding of cancer in humans.
She says there's no human equivalent of a transmissible cancer but there have been cases where organ transplant patients have developed cancer if cells were hidden in the donor organ.
She says it's highly unlikely devil facial tumour disease could spread to other species, including humans, but this will be the subject of future research.

This old spacesuit will be tossed out of the International Space Station at the weekend to become a cheap, home-spun satellite. It'll transmit messages back to Earth until its batteries die out, then become space junk
Three Russian spacesuits are being prepared for a spacewalk at the weekend from the International Space Station, but only two will be coming back inside when the planned six-hour excursion is over. 
There's no mutiny in the works, though it would be easy to think so after watching what station commander Bill McArthur and flight engineer Valery Tokarev have in mind.
They'll be tossing the third suit overboard. 
No one will be inside the free-flying suit. Rather, it is stuffed with old clothes, batteries and a couple of electronics boxes. An antenna is fixed to the suit's helmet.
Then it becomes a free-flying satellite in orbit around Earth until its batteries die and it becomes orbiting space junk.
Because its orbit is relatively low, it will be pulled back into Earth's atmosphere within a few weeks or months and be incinerated.
The being does have a name, SuitSat, and a message, though you will need an antenna and radio receiver to hear it.
Run by amateurs
SuitSat is an innovative, budget-free, volunteer effort of an international amateur radio organisation.
It's equipped with a series of messages that last 30 seconds and a picture that will be continuously transmitted for as long as its batteries hold out. 
"The idea was brought up at [an amateur radio] symposium in October 2004," says amateur radio operator Lou McFaden of Orlando.
"At the time we had started figuring out [a project] that we could do that was low enough in power. A Russian representative brought up that [Russian space officials] had been trying to find something more useful for these old suits they had on the station." 
Just in time
The project quickly gained momentum, but time was short. With donated equipment and volunteer time, SuitSat was pulled together in a matter of weeks, delivered to NASA, transported to Russia and launched aboard a cargo ship that arrived in September 2005. 
Its mission is set to begin at the weekend. Thousands of amateur radio buffs are expected to try to pick up SuitSat's transmission during its relatively short lifetime.
The suit's batteries likely will last only a few days, says McFaden, who built the hardware. 
SuitSat also contains a CD with hundreds of pictures, artwork, poems and signatures of students worldwide. 
Project organisers already have their eyes on another Russian spacesuit expected to be decommissioned later this year or in 2007. 
"We're hoping to be able to do it again," says McFadin. "We already decided some things we want to do on the next one if we get the chance." 
Tuning in
SuitSat's signal will be transmitted on 145.990 MHz FM. 
"All you need is an antenna, the bigger the better, and a radio receiver that you can tune to 145.990 MHz FM," says Frank Bauer with NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center. "A police band scanner or a hand-talkie ham radio would work just fine." 
A log of people who have made contact will be available on the SuitSat website.
SuitSat is an outgrowth of the amateur radio project already operating aboard the space station, Amateur Radio on International Space Station, or ARISS.

The latest computer virus, which arrives by email, is ready to delete your files this Friday
A destructive worm posing as a pornographic email may already have infected hundreds of thousands of computers and could erase many everyday files on 3 February, security experts warn. 
The Kama Sutra worm, which targets Microsoft, Adobe and ZIP files, is a threat because many users will not know the virus has infected their computers until it is too late, security experts say. 
They also estimate that the worm, which spreads by emailing itself to addresses in an infected computer's mailbox, may already have slipped onto 275,000 to 500,000 machines and is now simply waiting to obliterate files on Friday.
The virus, also known as Grew.A or MyWife, tricks users by appearing as an email attachment with subject lines such as Hot Movie, give me a kiss and Miss Lebanon 2006.
Some variations refer to the ancient Kama Sutra guide to elaborate sexual positions to attract attention and convince victims to open the email. 
"It claims to be a movie or picture with some sort of sexual content," says Johannes Ullrich, chief research officer at the nonprofit SANS Institute research group. "That is how it tricks you." 
The virus causes a keyboard and mouse to freeze. It then disables anti-virus programs when the computer is restarted, leaving a machine vulnerable, says Ken Dunham, rapid response director at VeriSign Corp's  security unit iDefense. 
The virus mainly has infected computers of vulnerable consumers and small businesses, which are far less likely to have up-to-date security software, he says. 
The Kama Sutra worm also stands out because its primary purpose is to destroy files rather than to seek financial gain or to take control of a computer, security experts say. 
Dunham says any users who suspect they may have triggered the worm should reinstall an anti-virus program and make sure the virus has been removed. 
"It is already under way and will be activated unless people get removal tools," he says. "If you have opened an email and your computer froze up, you should be very concerned."

Humans may have domesticated dogs much more recently than DNA studies suggest
One of the most extensive surveys of the earliest known dog burials suggests humans domesticated canines much later than other studies show.
The survey, which suggests domestication occurred between 13,000 and 17,000 years ago, counters some earlier theories based on gene changes that distinguish dogs from their wild wolf counterparts.
A few of those theories held that domestication occurred anywhere between 40,000 and 135,000 years ago, much earlier than the new study suggests.
The new study, published in the February issue of the Journal of Archaeological Science, suggests that the bond between humans and dogs coincides with canine burials. 
The earliest known morphological evidence of what was probabably dog remains dates to around 17,000 years ago in central Russia.
But the practice of burying dogs appears to have begun between 14,000 and 15,000 years ago. Burying dogs then became more common around 12,000 years ago.
"[This] was a time of major population expansion, starting with, for our purposes, colonisation for the first time of eastern Eurasia and finally on into the New World," says author Darcy Morey, an assistant professor in archaeology from the University of Kansas.
"This is just me being mushy and fuzzy, but it seems that folks were a little more willing to try things, like drift into previously unoccupied expanses, and maybe engage in human-animal associations that resulted in domestication." 
Morey believes the canine genetic break from wolves may not be linked to domestication. 
"Quite simply, if the dog and wolf genomes really did separate as long ago as some molecular studies have suggested, or even in that vicinity, the animals that were destined to become dogs must have made their living for some time essentially in the old-fashioned way, like wolves," he says. 
An evolving relationship
The burials reveal our evolving relationship with dogs. Often dog skeletons lay alongside human ones. 
In one 7000-year-old Swedish grave, archaeologists found the remains of a dog stretched out on the legs of a deceased man, as though the man hoped to hold and pet his canine friend for eternity. 
The dog's neck was broken, indicating that it had been killed when its owner died. 
Dogs buried without humans in North and Central America still show a loving touch and possibly a ritualised internment.
A grave found in what is now Rhode Island, for example, contains a prehistoric dog that was arranged to lie on its left side with its front paw under its head. 
Sign of the times
The age and condition of the dogs when they died also reveal domestication and the bond with humans, according to Morey.
He describes a Middle Archaic burial dating from 6700 to 7180 years ago that was found in what is now Tennessee. The male dog discovered in the grave was "unusually old". 
Its skeleton indicates the animal suffered from traumatic injuries, arthritis, a persistent infection, and broken bones, some of which had healed, and some that had not. 
"The pathological condition of this individual suggests that the owner insured the safety and well-being of the individual throughout its life since it is doubtful that, given all the traumatic and age degenerative manifestations, the dog could have survived in the absence of care," Morey explains. 
More evidence
Christyann Darwent, an assistant professor of anthropology at the University of California at Davis, says she agrees with Morey's time window for dog domestication. 
"Dogs and humans could have been hanging out together long before 17,000 years ago, but domestication means we were manipulating their breeding, and that probably didn't happen until more recently," she says.
"The burials represent some of the best evidence we have for the strong social ties that exist between dogs and humans." 
Darwent says domestication has benefited dogs and humans, but she suggests humans should take responsibility for their alteration of canines over the millennia. 
"Some dogs, such as my own pet, are so reliant on humans that they could never fend for themselves in the wild," she says.
"We must remember that we have manipulated them so much with domestication that they often must depend upon us now for their survival."

Moroccan runner Hicham El Guerrouj's world record will be left in the dust one day, according to a mathematical analysis of times for the men's one mile race
Athletes could run the mile 18 seconds faster than the current record, according to an Australian mathematician who's gone back over the past hundred years of records.
Dr Michael Deakin of Melbourne's Monash University  first calculated the absolute limit for the distance 40 years ago when he declared it to be 3 minutes 32 seconds.
He will tell a meeting of the Australian and New Zealand Industrial and Applied Mathematics group later today that he has since revised the data.
He now says athletes could run the mile in 3 minutes 25 seconds, much faster than the existing record of 3 minutes 43 seconds set by Morocco's Hicham El Guerrouj in 1999.
Deakin says more sophisticated computing technology and more records led him to revisit his earlier work.
"The reason for revisiting [my original study] is twofold," he says.
"There's a much bigger data set than there used to be and secondly you've got all sorts of computational tools you didn't back then.
"So I thought I'd give it another run for its money."
He didn't make any estimate of when, if ever, this new height in athletic performance would be scaled.
Deakin arrived at the figure using non-linear trend analysis, a branch of statistics commonly used in economic forecasting. 
"I plot the different records and then I drive a trend curve through it which cuts out all the ups and downs," he says.
"The idea of the trend curve is to have a line at the top which more or less always will be achieved, and a line at the bottom which is never to be achieved."
In the past he's also used the method to estimate calcium in the bodies of dialysis patients and the trajectory of arrows as described in a passage of Ancient Roman poetry.
A three minute mile?
The mile, the equivalent of 1609 metres, has been replaced by the 1500 metres but is still common in some countries.
And although international athletics bodies now only recognise world records for metric distances, they have made an exception for the mile and still keep records today.
The mile was once famed for the 4 minute barrier which, was thought to be impossible until Englishman Roger Bannister's time of a little over 3 minutes 59 seconds in 1954.
Speculation has now shifted to the 3 minute barrier, although most experts agree that athletes are unlikely to meet this without some sort of assistance.
Dr Shane Brun, a senior lecturer in medicine at James Cook University and vice-president of Sports Doctors Australia, says it's almost impossible to predict the bounds of athletic performance.
But humans will reach a stage where they simply can't get any better without some form of modification, he says.
"Whether that's through evolution or science or drugs we just don't know," he says.

New measurements of planet 2003 UB313, dubbed Xena, show its diameter is about 700 kilometres larger than Pluto's. So will UB313 be named the solar system's 10th planet?
Xena, the possible 10th planet in our solar system, is even larger then Pluto, research shows.
Astronomers led by Professor Frank Bertoldi of Germany's University of Bonn publish their findings today in the journal Nature.
They say they have measured reflected solar radiation from Xena, or 2003 UB313 to give it its official name, using a 30 metre telescope in Spain.
The result: UB313 has a diameter of about 3000 kilometers, about 700 kilometres larger than Pluto's.
This would make UB313 the largest solar system object to be spotted since the discovery of Neptune in 1846.
Astronomers have been debating the status of UB313 ever since the announcement last year that it had been discovered 15 billion kilometres from Earth.
Pluto's defenders blasted it, saying it was not a planet but a vulgar rock.
Astronomers get abusive
The polite term for such abuse is a KBO, Kuiper Belt Object, for the estimated 100,000 pieces of icy, primeval debris that slowly encircle the Sun on the outskirts of the solar system, far beyond the orbit of Neptune. 
The UB313 supporters' club responded tartly, claiming that if anything deserved the moniker of KBO, it was Pluto. 
For one thing, Pluto, discovered in 1930 by American Clyde Tombaugh, has a weird, unplanetary orbital plane. It is a whole 17&deg; off the horizontal plane taken by the eight other planets. 
Its path around the Sun is also so egg-shaped that for 20 years of its 248-year orbit it's inside the track of Neptune itself. 
Now, weighing powerfully in this group's favour, are the first detailed measurements of UB313's size. 
If the data is accepted by a special 19-member panel set up by the International Astronomical Union to determine what constitutes a planet, Pluto faces being booted out of the solar system's elite club, and downgraded to a mere KBO. 
Either that, or the planetary list will have to expand to include UB313 and possibly many others. 
Time's running out
For Bertoldi, time is running out for Pluto as the solar system's outermost planet.
"Since UB313 is decidedly larger than Pluto, it is now increasingly hard to justify calling Pluto a planet if UB313 is not also given this status," he says.
Pluto's humiliation is knowledge's gain, though.
"The discovery of a solar system object larger than Pluto is very exciting," says Dr Wilhelm Altenhoff of the Max Planck Institute for Radio Astronomy, a veteran watcher of asteroids and comets.
"It tells us that Pluto, which should properly also be counted to the Kuiper Belt, is not such an unusual object. Maybe we can find even other small planets out there, which could teach us more about how the solar system formed and evolved.
"The Kuiper Belt objects are the debris from its formation, an archaeological site containing pristine remnants of the solar nebula from which the Sun and the planets formed." 
UB313 has yet to be given an official name.
Professor Michael Brown, the California Institute of Technology astronomer who led the team that discovered UB313, informally calls it Xena after the warrior princess of TV fame.
But if the object is confirmed as a planet, he will be under pressure to name it, like the nine others, after a figure from Greek or Roman mythology.
In a naming competition run by the magazine New Scientist, readers' suggestions included Persephone, Pax, Galileo and Cerberus, as well as Rupert and Bob.
Last October, Brown and his team announced that Xena had a moon called Gabrielle, named after the on-screen warrior's travelling companion.

Pigeons will soon be equipped with a mobile phone to text their air pollution reports back to us on the ground
A flock of pigeons will monitor the sky for pollution then beam back their findings to a special pigeon blog, scientists say.
The 20 pigeons will carry a GPS satellite tracking receiver, air pollution sensors and a basic mobile phone, according to a report in New Scientist magazine.
The phone will allow text messages on air quality to be beamed back in real time to a website.
Miniature cameras slung around the pigeons' necks will also post aerial pictures.
The idea is the brainchild of researcher Beatriz da Costa, an assistant professor at the University of California at Irvine, and two of her students.
They have built a prototype of the pigeons' equipment, containing a mobile phone circuit board with SIM card and communication chips, a GPS receiver, and sensors capable of detecting carbon monoxide and nitrogen dioxide. 
"We are combining an air pollution sensor with a homemade [mobilephone]," da Costa told New Scientist.
The team is planning to squeeze all the components onto a single board small enough for the birds to carry in a backpack, the report says. 
The pigeons will take to the air at the Inter-Society for Electronic Arts annual symposium in San Jose in August. 
The data they send back will be displayed on the blog in the form of an interactive map.

Adding an immune system booster to diluted vaccines may mean a little vaccine goes a long way
Much smaller doses of vaccines may be needed to combat outbreaks of bird flu, tuberculosis and SARS than once thought, Canadian research shows.
The research by a team at the University of British Columbia could mean more shots will be available. 
The team led by Professor Wilfred Jefferies says standard doses can be reduced 100-fold and still be safe by adding an immune system booster commonly found in the human body. 
The study shows that when the immune system booster is added at low doses to vaccines and injected into mice exposed to rabies, measles and smallpox, an immune response kicks in to protect them from infection. 
The so-called TAP molecules deliver peptides inside cells from the body's immune system or vaccines.
If this transporter is switched off, as in cancerous cells, disease fighters cannot be moved where they need to go within the cell to do their job. 
The results of the seven-year study were published in a recent issue of the journal PLoS Pathogens. 
"This new paradigm is shown to be applicable to many viruses, including poxviruses, and could significantly advance the creation of new vaccines and improve those that already exist," the scientists say.
This could prove especially important if the H5N1 bird flu, expected by many to be the next worldwide pandemic, begins to pass between humans. 
What happens in a bird flu outbreak?
Bird flu has killed some 85 people since emerging in Asia in 2003. Experts say it could kill millions if it mutates into a form easily passed between humans.
It could take up to six months to develop a vaccine should human-to-human transmission occur. With smaller dose sizes, a hundred times more vaccine shots could be made within the same period of time. 
"We're hoping it will be incorporated into a number of different vaccines," says Jefferies. "It's powerful because we think it can make general vaccines much better." 
Smaller doses will also make some vaccines, including that for smallpox and anthrax, less toxic and therefore better tolerated by those with weaker immune systems, Jefferies says. 
HIV patients, in particular, could benefit, as well as up to an estimated 20% of the population who react badly to vaccines.
"Some pathogens don't currently have effective vaccines," says co-author Timothy Vitalis. "I hope the technology can be used to solve some of the needs in controlling infectious diseases." 
How do you boost a vaccine?
Jefferies first imagined the possibility of this application for vaccines after noticing that TAP is turned off in cancer cells, meaning that the body's natural immune defense does not recognise that it needs to attack these cells.
He found that when TAP was added to the cancerous cells the immune system suddenly 'switched on' and fought back. 
"TAP is a key molecule in the creation of immune responses," says Jefferies. "This molecule fought viruses when it was found in normal amounts in the cell. I thought, 'If a little bit is good, is a lot [of TAP] even better?" 
Researchers say they are not sure why the TAP molecules are turned off in cancer cells, but hope further study may eventually lead to a new cancer treatment too. But that is still years away. 
Jefferies says the team is currently trying the method out with prototype vaccines that could lead to clinical trials in the next two years, depending on funding. 
The research was primarily funded by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research.

This image shows the flash of light emitted when the Deep Impact probe smashed into the comet. The comet nucleus is in blue and maroon, and the impact flash is ringed in multiple colours
Ice has been detected on the nucleus, or solid body, of a comet for the first time, researchers report.
They say that Comet Tempel 1, the target of NASA's Deep Impact space probe, has three patches of ice on its surface.
But most of the frozen water probably lurks deeper inside.
Co-investigator Dr Jessica Sunshine and colleagues report their findings online today in the journal Science. 
The surface ice was detected by instruments on board the probe before it crashed into the comet in July last year.
Cameras spotted several patches bluer than surrounding areas. And infrared spectroscopy confirmed these patches were water ice.
The scientists suspect the ice is in large grains, probably aggregates. And the deposits are impure, with only a small fraction being water ice, the rest consisting of dust.
The surface deposits are also not enough to account for the water vapor in the cloud of gas and dust that surrounds the comet's nucleus, the scientists say.
"These new findings are significant because they show that our technique is effective in finding ice when it is on the surface," says Professor Michael A'Hearn of the University of Maryland, the project's principal investigator. 
"We can [also] therefore firmly conclude that most of the water vapor that escapes from comets is contained in ice particles found below the surface." 
Into the heart of a comet
Deep Impact slammed into the comet last year aiming to collect data about the comet's heart. 
Comets are of particular interest because they are believed to be made up of the leftover debris from the gas, dust, rocks and ice that formed the outer planets in our solar system some 4.6 billion years ago. 
Scientists have long known that comets contain substantial amounts of ice. But before Deep Impact, they did not know how ice was distributed throughout the comet's nucleus. 
Some astronomers believe comets 'seeded' Earth with some of the water and carbon-based molecules that make up living things.

Neanderthals used their knowledge of animal behaviour to hunt mountain goats like these Caucasian turs, just like early humans did
Neanderthals did not disappear because modern humans were better hunters and thus out-competed them for resources, say US and Israeli anthropologists.
On the contrary, they were top predators who knew how to hunt the biggest and fastest of the animals. 
Neanderthals went extinct about 30,000 years ago, after having inhabited Europe and parts of Asia for roughly 200,000 years.
The reason for their demise has been long debated and frequently attributed to modern humans' greater intelligence and consequently greater hunting skills. 
But evidence from animal remains hunted by Neanderthals clearly indicates these hominids were as good as any early modern humans at hunting, report Daniel Adler, an assistant professor and palaeoanthropologist at the University of Connecticut, and colleagues in the February issue of the journal Current Anthropology. 
The researchers examined abundant faunal remains, in particular thousands of bones belonging to a mountain goat species called the Caucasian tur that still exists today. 
The trove was excavated at Ortvale Klde, a rock shelter in the southern Caucasus in the Republic of Georgia dated to between 60,000 and 20,000 years ago. 
Evidence of killing
There was no doubt that the animals were hunted and killed. Indeed, the bones featured cut marks from human butchering and fragmentations typical of marrow consumption, showing that meat processing behaviours were not significantly different between Neanderthals and modern humans. 
"Given the abundance of animals, one might think that Neanderthals would kill as many animals as possible, regardless of age, and therefore nutritional returns," says Adler. 
But analysis of tooth wear revealed that two-thirds of the animals were animals of prime age, the strongest, fastest, most nutritious and most difficult to capture members of the herd. 
"Neanderthals, like the modern humans that followed them, were quite savvy, choosing instead to maximise their dietary intake per energy expended by hunting prime age adults. 
"Given the species involved and the rough terrain, this would require sophisticated hunting tactics, [and] knowledge of animal behaviour, in particular migration routes and flight behaviour, and group cooperation," Adler says. 
Expert timing
Neanderthals timed their hunts for late autumn to early spring, during the Caucasian tur's seasonal migration to lower elevations, where the site of Ortvale Klde is located. 
"They maintained an intimate relationship with their environment and were capable of understanding exactly where and when particular resources could be found in abundance," Adler says. 
Archaeologist John Shea, an associate professor at Stony Brook University says:
"The study is excellent, precisely what is needed: a comparison of how Neanderthals and modern humans used the same landscape close enough in time so that any differences discovered reflect behavioural differences and not environmental ones." 
Still a mystery
Shea believes that multiple factors, varying from region to region, may have played a role in the disappearance of Neanderthals. 
"The simple answer to the question of why Neanderthals became extinct is 'nobody knows'. But studies like this one certainly move us a lot closer to being able to make more clearly testable hypotheses," he says.
"Now the hypothesis that Neanderthals became extinct because they were ineffective hunters is in deep trouble."

A book at bedtime doesn't guarantee children become better readers in the long run, researchers say. Their genes play a bigger role
Genes, rather than reading to young children at home, have a greater influence on how they learn to read once they reach school, researchers say.
The study, published in the latest issue of the Journal of Research in Reading, is the first to demonstrate the influence of genes on potential reading ability in children younger than six.
The study of pre-school age twins from Australia, the US, Norway and Sweden followed into their early school years, found genetic variability accounted for most of the differences in skills that predicted later reading ability.
These skills included understanding the sounds in words, familiarity with letters and verbal fluency.
Australian researcher Brian Byrne, professor of psychology from the University of New England in Armidale, stresses that the amount of time carers spend reading to children at home is important.
But the research shows the significance of supporting pre-school age children who are having difficulties with letters and words.
"If a child is reading poorly in part because they are not as genetically well-endowed as other children, we know we will need to work harder and devote more resources to get them up to scratch," says Byrne.
By the end of their second year at school, the Australian children in the study show almost no trace of the influence of their home environment on reading ability, he says.
And the influence of genetic variability actually increases as children get older, he adds.
"We don't know which genes are involved but some of the genes in question affect brain development, maybe even embryonically. My guess is that in about five years, we will have identified a suite of actual genes that are driving this."
Identifying children with problems
Byrne says the study highlights the importance of identifying children much earlier who might develop reading disorders, especially dyslexia.
"There is evidence that early and focused intervention for potential reading disorders in children with family histories of dyslexia can lead to grade-level performance in the early school years," he says.
"Our findings should act as a spur to continued research, to adoption of the best evidence-based teaching practices and to early identification of children at risk for reading disability."

DNA evidence has questioned the quality of tzi's sperm, which may have affected his standing in Stone Age society
A Stone Age man found frozen in the Alps some 5300 years after he was murdered under mysterious circumstances may have been a childless social outcast, a new study shows. 
Italian anthropologist Dr Franco Rollo, from the University of Camerino, studied fragments of the DNA belonging to tzi, as the mummy has become known.
Rollo and his colleagues describe in the American Journal of Physical Anthropology how he found two typical mutations common among men with reduced sperm mobility.
A high percentage of men with such a condition are sterile, according to the museum that stores tzi the iceman.
"Insofar as the 'iceman' was found to possess both mutations, the possibility that he was unable to father offspring cannot be eliminated," says the South Tyrol Museum of Archaeology in the Alpine town of Bolzano.
"This not improbable hypothesis raises new questions concerning his social rank within his society," it adds, arguing that the new evidence supports a theory that views the man as a social outcast. 
Hikers discovered tzi in the mountains between Italy and Austria in 1991. 
In 2001, scientists found an arrowhead in the iceman's shoulder blade, and tests revealed blood from four different people on his clothes and a cut in his hand, possibly from a fight. 
Medicine in the man's pockets and sophisticated weapons seemed to indicate that he was a shaman or a chieftain.
One theory says tzi was the victim of a power struggle in his own tribe. A rival theory proposes the opposite, that he was a reject. 
Rollo and his colleagues were also able to assign the mummy's DNA to one of the basic groups of human DNA historically occurring in Europe. 
His basic DNA resembles that of the Ladines, an ethnic group still living in the region today, and that of residents of the tztal valley where he was found, the museum says.

The discovery of plant viruses in human faeces raises questions about the safety of human waste as fertiliser
Faeces from healthy humans contains live viruses, most of which are plant viruses that could sicken and deform plants, an international study shows.
The finding, published in the current issue of the journal PloS Biology, could have implications for the use of human waste as fertiliser.
Collected water, otherwise known as reclaimed or grey water, may also contain deadly plant viruses.
But future studies are needed to determine if such water, which is sometimes used for irrigation, can infect plants. 
The researchers say the viruses we pass probably do not harm us and airborne transmission is unlikely.
Instead, the viruses probably hitch a ride through the human body via food, even when the food is cooked or dried. 
"The fact that we could detect plant viruses in mixtures of foods consumed by the [study] donors suggests that the plant viruses found in human faeces originate from our food," says Mya Breitbart, one of the study's authors, a San Diego State University biologist. 
"For example, PMMV [pepper mild mottle virus] was detected in processed chilli sauces and chilli powder, but not in fresh peppers. 
PMMV survives processing of foods and passage through the human gut, and the viral particles are known to be extremely stable," she adds.
"There is no evidence that people should try to avoid getting this virus. It most likely has no adverse effects on human health."
Plants are not so lucky. Peppers infected with this virus can experience stunted growth and sunken brown spots that look like rot on the fruit.
The researchers found the pepper virus in 14 of 20 human faeces samples collected from healthy individuals in California and Singapore.
The virus might even multiply in the human gut, the researchers say, as the amount in the faeces was more than the virus load measured in food. 
The scientists analysed in detail the faeces from two of the test subjects, who came from San Diego, and were able to identify 36,769 RNA virus sequences representing 35 known plant viruses, two animal viruses, one yeast virus and four bacteria. 
One of the animal viruses is linked to diarrhoea, while the other, Moloney murine leukaemia virus, has been linked to cancer in humans and animals.
Some 24 of the identified plant viruses are known to harm consumable crops, including fruits, vegetables, tobaccos and cereals. 
"I am not aware of any cases where a plant virus has mutated into a virus that caused harm to humans. However, it is important to understand and characterise the viruses that are present in the guts of healthy humans in order to understand what is happening in the case of disease," Breitbart says.
"For example, if we want to look at the viruses associated with gastrointestinal problems, we will need a baseline to compare against." 
She even thinks humans might someday benefit from plant viruses, since scientists might be able to deliver medications for diarrhoea and other intestinal disorders using the viruses, now that it is known the viruses survive the acidic, arduous journey through our bodies. 
Surprised
David Relman, associate professor of microbiology, immunology and medicine at Stanford University, says is "surprised to see a plant virus dominate in terms of relative abundance to such an extent". 
"One might then wonder whether this is simply a relatively unique finding to one or few individuals with a specific dietary proclivity. But these investigators show that the findings are relevant to a diverse group of humans." 
He does not think the findings are worrisome. 
"It is probably the case that these viruses have been with us for some time," Relman says.

A waiting room questionnaire will make it easier for doctors to spot people anxious about their health, but with no physical symptoms, psychologists say
One in 16 Australian patients suffers from imaginary ills, the country's first study into the prevalence of hypochondria reveals. 
The research by psychologist Dr John Franklin of Macquarie University and colleagues, which will be submitted for publication, looked at 1381 patients who attended 13 family doctor surgeries across the state of New South Wales.
It found 6.2% of the population presented with a primary diagnosis of hypochondriasis.
"That's quite high," Franklin says.
It is generally estimated that only a third of patients who visit a general practitioner have a condition that is purely physical.
"At least a half, but variously estimated at about two-thirds, have a condition that's in some part the result of social or psychological factors," Franklin says.
"Roughly a third of the total patients actually have what you might call a psychosomatic condition, which is something that has a physical manifestation but has really got an underlying psychological cause."
Health anxiety
Franklin and his team went further to specifically investigate hypochondriasis, a condition where a person believes they have a serious illness in the absence of confirming physical evidence.
"This is more than just a psychosomatic condition. It's a condition where the patient actually believes that they have something seriously wrong with themselves," Franklin says.
Patients with hypochondriasis, or health anxiety as psychologists prefer to describe it, usually complain of physical symptoms, but these tend to be vague and non-specific.
The patients in the study were assessed using a questionnaire devised by Franklin and his colleagues called the Health Anxiety Interview Schedule.
Franklin says the form was designed as an alternative to the current international standard, the Whiteley Index, which he says isn't specific enough and doesn't link into the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders criteria for hypochondriasis.
A new test
The new test is described in the current Journal of Psychosomatic Research.
Franklin says it is more targeted, more streamlined and designed to be filled out by patients in the general practitioner's waiting room.
"The score they get can alert the GP to the possibility that there are social or psychological issues that might be going on," he says.
Questions relate to symptoms, physical signs, what the patient thinks is wrong, how long they've had concerns, whether they have found previous explanations reassuring and whether other doctors are seeing them.
On average, patients who fell into the health anxiety category were seeing between three and four doctors, the research found.
Franklin says it's important to identify patients with health anxiety because, along with children in the first year of life and people in their last, this group uses the lion's share of health resources.

Mmm, definitely rage. Computers are learning to recognise your emotions and soothe your stress
Wouldn't it be great if your computer could recognise when you're frustrated with it and adjust itself to calm you down? Emotion-sensing technology could someday allow a computer to do just that, researchers say. 
Computer scientist Christian Peter of Germany's Fraunhofer Institute for Computer Graphics and his colleagues are working on a system that collects data about a person's emotional state using sight, sound and touch technology. 
The system then interprets the information and reacts accordingly. 
For example, if a computer senses that its user is agitated, it might tone down the background colour of the screen, turn down background music, enlarge or reduce graphics, adjust the flow of information being presented to the user or simply apologise. 
"With humans, somebody who ignores the feelings of others is not liked as much as somebody who shows some sort of emotional feedback. Why should it be different with computers?" says Peter.
But sensing emotions from a person is not always easy. 
Current methods for collecting the data require researchers to wire users with electrodes and monitor their behaviour in a laboratory. 
Less-obtrusive means, such as using a video to monitor gestures or a recorder to analyse voice, allow the user to behave more naturally. But the data can break down if the person moves too far away. 
Tuning in to your emotions
Peter and his team are working on technology that unobtrusively senses a person's emotions while they interact freely with a computer.
Their latest prototype is a wireless electronic glove that measures heart rate, blood pressure and skin temperature. 
Peter will be demonstrating the wireless glove at the CeBIT exhibition in Hanover, Germany, in March. 
"Fraunhofer has been on the leading of edge of innovating," says computer scientist Professor Rosalind Picard of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Information gathered by the glove is transmitted wirelessly to a base unit, which stores it on a memory card or sends it to a computer database.
Software written by Peter's team analyses the data and retrieves patterns that indicate certain emotions. 
Is that anger I'm sensing?
For example, if a person's heart rate increases quickly and their skin temperature falls below a certain threshold, it may indicate that they are angry.
A different combination of other variables suggests the person is slightly surprised or very surprised. 
The Fraunhofer team is also working on technology that will read facial features using an ordinary webcam.
The goal is to collect all the emotion-indicating information in one database, analyse it in real time and program the computer to respond immediately.

Stem cell lines derived from abnormal embryos can improve our knowledge of genetic diseases, researchers say
Australian researchers are seeking the country's first licences to make stem cell lines from freshly created human embryos with genetic abnormalities.
This is a shift from the current situation where all research in Australia on human embryos has been confined to frozen spare embryos created during previous in-vitro fertilisation (IVF) treatment.
The medical director of Sydney IVF, Dr Robert Jansen, says the group has applied to the National Health and Medical Research Council's licensing committee for two licences for fresh embryos.
One relates to embryos created during IVF, but having genetic diseases like Huntington's, cystic fibrosis and muscular dystrophy.
The second licence is for IVF embryos that have failed to develop properly and contain chromosomal abnormalities or mutations.
"Both the new licences are [to] intentionally produce abnormal stem cell lines so that they can be used for research into the relevant diseases," Jansen says.
Dr David Cram of Monash IVF and his colleague, stem cell pioneer Professor Alan Trounson, are also seeking access to embryos with genetic diseases.
"We are going through a process at the moment to gain approval for using embryos that are being found to be affected by genetic disease for creating stem cell lines," Cram says.
"The whole idea is that we believe that these stem cell lines will be useful in ultimately identifying new treatments for patients to identify a potential drug to change the abnormality."
Fresh or frozen?
The use of fresh embryos was addressed by the stem cell and cloning Legislation Review Committee, which handed down its report last December about changes to current stem cell research laws.
The Lockhart report recommends that "fresh ART [assisted reproductive technology] embryos that are diagnosed by pre-implantation genetic diagnosis as being unsuitable for implantation should be permitted to be used, under licence, for research, training and improvements in clinical practice".
Cram says legislative changes will be required before researchers can have access to fresh, as opposed to frozen embryos.
However, Jansen says the restrictions on using fresh embryos are not enshrined in law, but are only a "suggestion" of the Australian Health Ethics Committee, which stipulates a two-week waiting period before a couple commits an embryo to research.
The timeframe effectively rules out the use of fresh embryos, which would be too old to use for stem cells after two weeks.
Pre-implantation genetic diagnosis
The abnormal embryos the researchers are seeking will be the products of pre-implantation genetic diagnosis (PIGD), which allows scientists to detect abnormalities in a blastocyst before it's implanted in the womb.
In a paper published in the journal Endocrine Reviews, Trounson reviews the use of chromosomally abnormal or mutant human embryos from IVF clinics using PIGD.
"These lines are an important resource for functional genomics, drug screening and, perhaps eventually, cell and gene therapy," he writes.
Cram says it's also more efficient to use fresh embryos because freezing can damage them.
He says the group will also apply to import stem cell lines created from abnormal embryos internationally to "cover all our bases" in case the application for a licence is unsuccessful.
Ethical issues
Associate Professor Sue Dodds, from the University of Wollongong specialises in feminist approaches to bioethics.
She says the biggest ethical issues about using fresh embryos relate to the potential to put pressure on women to provide embryos on demand for research, rather than creating them as part of a legitimate IVF process.
She says there are also perceptions about the so-called "slippery slope" towards production-line approaches to human life.
"As a matter of public policy it's been decided that we cannot create embryos for the purpose of research [but can only] use ones that would otherwise be destroyed because they're not being used for IVF," she says.

Ice crystals from cirrus storm clouds can regenerate, say scientists who have caught them on film
Cirrus clouds don't just form and die, but can regenerate, detailed images of ice crystals show.
The pictures are some of the first results to come out of the Tropical Warm Pool International Cloud Experiment being conducted from Darwin by the Australian Bureau of Meteorology and international researchers.
The information will improve our understanding of the life cycle of these high-altitude clouds and help us to make better predictions about climate change, the scientists say.
US researcher, Dr Jim Mather from the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, says it's been speculated that cirrus clouds can regenerate.
But the latest images have "caught them in the act".
In older clouds, the ice crystals are small and pristine, which suggests they are newly formed.
"In older cirrus the crystals are actually being regenerated," he says.
"They're growing fresh crystals, so while the cloud appears to be a continuous sheet extending well out from the storm there's actually a life cycle within the cloud."
Thin and wispy
Cirrus clouds are the most common high-altitude cloud and can be found at altitudes of 8-17 kilometres from the surface of the Earth.
They can form sheets of up to 1000 kilometres across at temperatures between -20&deg; and -70&deg;C.
These thin and wispy clouds are made of tiny ice particles. They are a by-product of storms, lasting up to 12 hours afterwards.
Mather says cirrus clouds are an important factor in climate change because of the role they play in the interchange of solar energy between space and the Earth.
"If temperatures increase, what will be the effect on these clouds? Will they increase or decrease in area or extent? Because that can have an effect in either warming or cooling the climate," he says.
The images confirm that at higher altitudes there are some very small, spherical particles, about 20 micrometres in diameter.
More complex crystalline shapes were found at lower altitudes at the base of the cloud.
Mather says scientist have been discussing what shape ice crystals you might find at very high altitudes and very low temperatures.
"There's been an expectation that if you look at a freshly produced cloud from a thunderstorm it's going to be quite complex as the particles crash into each other and form large aggregate chains.
"But as you get well away from the storm you expect to get more pristine crystals.
"Actually seeing these images and confirming the ideas was really an epiphany."

Australian women should be given the option of taking a pill to terminate a pregnancy, advocates of the RU-486 drug say. But not everyone agrees
The abortion drug RU-486 is not like most drugs that chug through Australia's regulatory system.
Rarely has the availability of a drug been tied to such charged emotions, including headlines that warn of backyard miscarriages for desperate women.
Part of the debate, which is due to come to a head in a parliamentary vote later this week, relates to the drug's safety and efficacy.
Does RU-486, otherwise known as Mifeprex or mifepristone, have side-effects? And how does it compare with surgical abortions?
Under the current system, the conservative, Catholic, anti-abortion health minister Tony Abbott, has the final say on the drug.
But advocates of RU-486 say that decision should rest solely with health experts at the Therapeutic Goods Administration, as it does for other drugs in Australia.
Heated debate
RU-486 was developed in France in the 1980s and is used for terminating a pregnancy at less than nine weeks.
Sexual Health and Family Planning Australia says RU-486 has been used by more than 21 million women around the world and is available in 35 countries, including the UK, US, New Zealand, France, Sweden, Greece and Spain.
The drug works by blocking the effects of the hormone progesterone, which a woman needs to start and maintain a pregnancy.
It breaks down the lining of the uterus, which can no longer hold onto the fertilised egg.
Usually, the woman has to return to her doctor two days later for a prostaglandin, a drug that causes her uterus to contact and expel the products of conception.
How safe is it?
Associate Professor Anne Tonkin, a clinical pharmacologist from the University of Adelaide and a drug adviser to the federal government, says:
"Mifepristone is not a risky drug, and is not a particular threat to women's safety. It is not a poison or a toxin, and has very few side-effects.
"It works by mimicking a common cause of natural miscarriage. The side-effects are the same as those of a spontaneous natural abortion, and include bleeding as part of the normal response."  
She says that in 95% of cases, a miscarriage induced by mifepristone used in combination with a prostaglandin requires no further treatment. 
"In about 5%, as is the case for natural miscarriage, a minor surgical procedure is required to complete the abortion. This means that 95% of women who would otherwise have required an operative procedure could avoid it with the use of mifepristone," she says.
But a study that looked at all side-effects of the drug reported to the US Food and Drug Administration over a four-year period found there were serious effects.
These included four otherwise healthy women who had died from bleeding or septic shock after taking the drug, the most common side-effects reported by all women.
Of the 607 adverse events analysed in the February issue of the Annals of Pharmacotherapy, there were women who reported foetal abnormalities that appeared after failed abortion attempts, ruptured ectopic pregnancies and allergic reactions.
Emergency access
Chief medical officer Professor John Horvath has been concerned about the risks of later side-effects in some women who take the drug.
In written advice to the health minister on the safety for women in remote areas, he says RU-486 "carries a significantly higher risk [than surgical abortion] of later adverse events".
And he says that if doctors are not supported by services that could deal with emergency complications out of hours, this would "substantially increase the risks to women undergoing termination".
Another recent study, published in the journal Contraception, concludes the "safety of mifepristone is high".
When it analysed the results from more than 95,000 RU-486 abortions in the US, it found few serious medical complications in everyday use.
Some 2.2 per 1000 women had a complication, most commonly heavy bleeding. And 1.1 per 100,000 women died after taking the drug.
By comparison, the mortality rate from surgical abortion was 1 per 100,000 women.
Others have argued that rather than debating which abortion method is best, the aim of the current debate is to offer women a choice.
The Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, for instance, argues that RU-486 should be an option.
Many politicians are yet to reveal whether they back availability of RU-486, so it is unclear which way parliament will vote.
But debate on the drug is likely to continue regardless of the outcome.

At least 23 companies have raced to register the domain name sex.eu
Hundreds of thousands of businesses raced to snap up '.eu' internet domain names, with 'sex.eu' taking the prize for the most sought-after address on the first day companies could apply.
Two months after the .eu domain name was launched for public institutions and trademark holders, the tag was opened up to companies other than those seeking a site for a brand, as well as for art works and literature. 
Within the first hour, sex.eu domain had received 23 applications, followed by schumacher.eu with 15, realestate.eu with 12 and business.eu also with 12 applications, according to the European Registry of Internet Domain Names (Eurid). 
In the first 15 minutes Eurid, a nonprofit organisation appointed by the European Commission to manage requests, received 27,949 applications overall and after one hour the number had risen to 71,235. 
The .eu domain name is not supposed to replace national endings such as .fr and .de but rather offer the possibility of a pan-European identity in cyberspace. 
Germans led the way by mid afternoon making up a little more than 30% of the total applications received to date followed by the Netherlands with 16% percent and France with just over 10%. 
Individuals will have to wait until the second quarter of 2006 before trying to get access to their own veritable European piece of the internet. 
For updates on who's applying for the .eu domain name, see the Eurid website.

This kentia or thatch palm grows near its sister species, the curly palm. So how did the two species arise when there are no geographical barriers between them?
One of the world's best examples of sympatric speciation, when two species from a single ancestor form in the absence of a geographical barrier, has been found among the swaying palm trees on Australia's Lord Howe Island.
Researchers have found two sister species of palms living side by side on the tiny World Heritage listed island 580 kilometres off Australia's east coast.
The two species, the kentia or thatch palm (Howea forsteriana) and curly palm (H. belmoreana), appear to have diverged after they began flowering at different times of year, probably as a result of differing soil preferences.
The international team of researchers, including those from the UK's Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, reports its findings online today in the journal Nature.
It's generally accepted that evolution occurs by one species breaking into two by the process of allopatric speciation.
This might occur when, say, a mountain range separates a species and the two populations change gradually until they become so different they can no longer interbreed.
But there are also theoretical reasons to believe that a species can split into two within its own area, a phenomenon known as sympatric speciation.
The researchers used a range of techniques to show that the palm species are sisters and indeed diverged much more recently than the island's creation by volcanic activity 6.4-6.9 million years ago.
They calculate that the palms' common ancestor probably arrived from mainland Australia as long as 4.5-5.5 million years ago. And more recently, H. forsteriana diverged from its related species, an ancestor of H. belmoreana.
Soil is the key
They note that the flowering times of the palm trees differed on different soils, indicating the ancestors of the two species may have adapted to different soil types.
They add that perhaps living on those different soil types modified the palm trees' flowering times, reducing their chance of interbreeding.
"That's probably what kick-started the speciation process and resulted in them finally being two separate species," says Associate Professor David Rowell, from the Australian National University, Canberra.
"This paper is very clever because it uses Lord Howe Island, which is very small, and where it is very unlikely that a species would be split into two, and so therefore it seems to be very strong evidence that sympatric speciation has occurred in this case.
"That being the case, it lends strength to the models, hypotheses and theories that people have put up about how evolution works."
Fishy clues to new species
Meanwhile, German researchers have discovered another case of apparent sympatric speciation, this time in two species of fish in Lake Apoyo crater, in Nicaragua.
A report in today's Nature says the lake is just 5 kilometres across and less than 23,000 years old. But DNA profiling shows that, during that time, it was colonised by the species Amphilophus citrinellus, which gave rise to A. zaliosus.

This owlet nightjar is one of the species found in the 'lost world' of West Papua, a world where animals show no fear of humans
The lost world largely untouched by humans that was recently unearthed on West Papua may be the last such find on Earth, an expedition scientist says.
His comments follow the discovery of a world teeming with new species, giant flowers and rare wildlife showing no fear of humans.
Australian, US and Indonesian scientists, led by Conservation International (CI), say they found the 300,000-hectare paradise in the Foja Mountains of the Indonesian-controlled province during an expedition late last year.
The local Kwerba and Papasena people, who are customary landowners of the forest, acted as guides and naturalists.
"The first bird I saw when I got out of the helicopter turned out to be a new species of honeyeater," says team member Kris Helgen.
The bird was an orange-faced honeyeater, a bird with a bright orange face-patch.
Helgen, who is completing a PhD under Dr Tim Flannery of the South Australian Museum, says the honeyeater is the first new species of bird found in New Guinea since 1940.
"Seeing that as the first bird was the clue that we were onto something big," he says.
The team also captured the first photos of the male Berlepsch's six-wired bird of paradise (Parotia berlepschi) in its natural habitat.
This bird was one of a number first collected in the late 19th century by indigenous hunters and sent to Victorian England where it was described as being of "unknown location". Several subsequent expeditions failed to find the bird.
"It's definitely an area of great biological novelty," says Helgen. "There are lots of things found in these mountains that are found nowhere else."
The team took the first photos of the golden-fronted bowerbird (Amblyornis flavifrons) displaying at its bower, a tower of twigs and other forest materials it builds for the mating ritual.
The bowerbird, like the bird of paradise, had been collected in Victorian times but no one knew where it came from.
In 1979, University of California's, Professor Jared Diamond was the first to demonstrate that the Foja Mountains was the true homeland of the bowerbird.
A lost world
Helgen says while Diamond made observations of a number of birds in the Foja Mountains, he did not collect data or specimens.
"We were the first to mount the true scientific expedition," he says.
Helgen says, apart from the reports from Diamond, there is no evidence that humans have ever been to the mountain range. Even the locals who took part in this latest research had never been there. 
The researchers say the area is probably a 15 or 20 day walk from the nearest village.
"Not only are there no people but there are no things that people bring with them: rats, dogs, pigs," says Helgen, adding these animals affect native fauna.
"It is a world that's been lost elsewhere," he says. "Much of the world would have looked like that at some point.
"What's so interesting and unique is that it might be last time this is ever done: high adventure, true exploration of a place where no one has set foot hardly."
Animals without fear for people
The team also found mammals that show no fear of humans. For example they were able to pick two long-beaked echidnas, a primitive egg-laying mammal, that had been hunted to near extinction elsewhere.
"The animals there just don't know people because people have never lived here. That's a very, very rare thing in this day and age," says Helgen.
The team also found a golden-mantled tree kangaroo (Dendrolagus pulcherrimus), which had previously only been found on a single mountain in neighbouring Papua New Guinea.
And they found new species of plants including the largest rhododendron flower on record, almost 15 centimetres across, more than 20 new frogs and four new butterflies.
Pretty impressive
Dr Ken Aplin, an evolutionary biologist who specialises in mammals of Australia and New Guinea, describes the find as  "pretty impressive" and agrees the remoteness of the Foja Mountains explains why it is in such pristine condition.
"People will generally hunt within a days travel of the village," says Aplin of CSIRO Sustainable Ecosystems, currently based at the Kyoto University Museum in Japan.
Aplin says mountain ranges such as Foja originally started life as a series of oceanic islands off to the north of New Guinea, which over time, came closer and closer to the main central range and connected up in the past million years.
"So they were evolving their own faunas prior to becoming part of New Guinea," he says.
Other ranges along the north coast the Foja range would have evolved unique species too, he says, but their biodiversity would have been affected by humans, feral pigs and dogs.
"In a global context it may well be unique or very nearly so, in being one of the last places that is not showing any impact at all of human activities."
The expedition was co-sponsored by the Indonesian Institute of Science (LIPI) and received funding from the Swift Foundation, the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation, the National Geographic Society and the Global Environment Project Institute.

This dinosaur, Guanlong wucaii, lived millions of years before T-Rex and is the oldest tyrannosaur ever found
It had an odd-looking crest and long arms, but a fossil dug up in a remote Chinese desert is the earliest example yet found of a tyrannosaur, scientists report.
The creature, named Guanlong wucaii, lived 160 million years ago, more than 90 million years before Tyrannosaurus rex.
It shows the tyrannosaur family had an extensive history, the researchers report in today's issue of the journal Nature. 
"Guanlong is the oldest and most primitive tyrannosaur," says Professor James Clark of George Washington University, who helped to lead the study.
T. rex, the best-known tyrannosaur, lived 65 million to 70 million years ago, during the Cretaceous period. This latest find is 90 million years older. 
"It is really pushing the record of tyrannosaurs back into the Jurassic," Clark says. 
Clark's team found two examples of the early tyrannosaur in the Junggar Basin in northwestern China, a largely unexplored cold desert.
Back in the Jurassic, the area would have been a large wetland bounded by mountains, says geologist Dr David Eberth of the Royal Tyrell Museum in Alberta, Canada.
It would have been warm, with sporadic volcanic explosions, he says. 
"These animals were found in mud rock," says Eberth, adding the deposits were made of sand, clay and volcanic material that secured the fossilised bones for millennia.
The wind has now eroded the dried deposits of tens of millions of years. "It is very easy to see what is in the rocks, what is coming out of the rocks," Clark says. 
The researchers camp out in the desolate region in the summers, working between sandstorms. They hire local people to walk across the rocks, systematically searching for protruding fossils. 
Sharp teeth
It was one such employee who spotted a bit of Guanlong sticking out and eventually the palaeontologists dug up two nearly complete skeletons, one on top of another. 
"We knew right away that this was a theropod dinosaur," Clark says. It had sharp teeth and clearly was a two-legged animal. 
But one of the two specimens had an unusual, thin crest on its head, and there was a place on the second skull where one appeared to have been broken off. 
"It's a very unusual skull with this crest coming off it," Clark says. "It doesn't immediately shout tyrannosaur when you first see it."
But other identifiers marked it as a tyrannosaur, including distinctive structures in the pelvis. 
The thin crest probably was used for display, Clark says. It has been coloured red in the reconstruction, although scientists have no idea what colour it would have been. 
They have also given the animal bright purple feathers.
"We have no evidence of feathers in this species," Clark says. "But there is evidence of feathers in another primitive tyrannosaur. We are fairly confident that it did have feathers." 
Dr Gregory Erickson of Florida State University studied the 'growth rings' in the animals' shin bones and determined that one specimen would have been about seven years old and thus a juvenile, and the other a 12-year-old adult. 
The creatures were about 3 metres long, compared to T. rex, which reached lengths of 14 metres. They do not have T. rex's shortened forelimbs.
The researchers, led by Dr Xu Xing of the Institute of Vertebrate Palaeontology and Palaeoanthropology at the Chinese Academy of Sciences in Beijing, named the new dinosaur Guanlong wucaii.
The genus name is derived from the Mandarin word for 'crowned dragon' and species name refers to the region where it was found.

Be careful what you wish for this Valentine's Day
French kissing puts teens at greater risk of contracting meningococcal disease than their lip-pecking counterparts, UK research shows.
While intimate kissing with multiple partners appears to increase the risk of contracting the disease, the UK study found that recently attending a religious event was associated with a low risk.
The study, published this week in the British Medical Journal, involved about 300 teenagers aged 15 to 19 who had been admitted to hospital with a meningococcal infection.
Lead researcher, Professor Robert Booy, co-director of Australia's National Centre for Immunisation Research and Surveillance at the Children's Hospital at Westmead says that the microbes that we normally carry in our throats are readily transmitted to another person through intimate kissing.
For meningococcal disease, this is the bacteria Neisseria meningitidis. Infection can lead to blood poisoning (meningococcal septicaemia), inflammation of the outer lining around the brain and spinal cord (meningococcal meningitis), or a combination of the two.
"When microbes that cause meningitis are transferred from one person to another, the body's immune system is normally able to repel them and they don't do any harm," he says.
"But if by chance you have a sore throat because of a smoky atmosphere or an existing virus, the inflammation in your throat disrupts the protective epithelial membrane.
"This makes it easy for the meningococcal microbes to pass through the lining of the throat into the blood stream and travel up to the brain where they cause meningitis."
But teens who avoid smoky parties and don't kiss with a sore throat may still be at high risk, the study suggests.
University students are a high-risk group, the study shows, as are teens who were born pre-term or who had glandular fever. Substance misuse was another high-risk behaviour.
"Our research suggests that vaccination is still the most effective way to reduce the risk of meningococcal disease. But behavioural changes remain important because the vaccines available don't protect against all causes of meningococcal diseases," Booy says.
He speculates that teens with a religious lifestyle may have fewer opportunities to exchange saliva, thus putting them at low risk of the disease.
"Believers might prefer to account for this particular finding as the power of prayer. Or it could be that the non-church goers lied about their kissing activities," he says.

The nearby supernova 1987A in its dying moments
Milliseconds before a giant star dies in a spectacular explosion, it hums a note around 'middle C', astronomers say.
In the April issue of The Astrophysical Journal, Professor Adam Burrows of the University of Arizona and team will report the song that immediately precedes the explosion of a supernova.
"We were quite sure when we started seeing this phenomenon that we were seeing sound waves, but it was so unexpected that we kept re-checking and re-testing our results," says Burrows.
Astronomers have long been trying to understand what happens when a supernova, a massive star, collapses and explodes.
Once it reaches death's door, a supernova's core is so dense that it does not allow energy to escape, and the star collapses inwards towards the core.
Until now scientists had assumed that the spectacular explosion in a star's dying moments was due to the star's outer shell bouncing back off the core.
But, says Australian supernova expert Dr Stuart Ryder of the Anglo-Australian Observatory in Sydney, none of the models of exploding supernovae to date have supported this theory.
Basically the models don't show enough energy coming from the core bounce to overcome the collapsing outer layers.
"The stuff trying to expand would keep running into the stuff that is still collapsing and it would literally stall the explosion," says Ryder. 
There have been various attempts to tweak the models, including taking account of  neutrinos, which are emitted from supernovae.
But scientists found that these subatomic particles also do not provide enough energy to make the models work. The models still stalled before the explosion.
Sound waves provide missing link
Burrows and team have now developed computer models to simulate the events of a dying star, from the collapse of the core through to the supernova explosion.
"Our simulations show that the inner core starts to execute pulsations," says Burrows.
"They show that after about 500 milliseconds [after the core collapses] the inner core begins to vibrate wildly. And after 600, 700 or 800 milliseconds, this oscillation becomes so vigorous that it sends out sound waves.
"In these computer runs, these sound waves actually cause the star to explode, not the neutrinos."
The researchers say typical sound frequencies in the inner core are about 200 to 400 hertz, in the audible range around middle C.
A million steps
The new models involve a million steps and simulate the full second between core collapse and explosion. 
Previous models, which did not take into account sound waves, had only one fifth the number of steps and simulate only the first few hundred milliseconds after core collapse.
Ryder says Burrows and team could have found the "missing link" in understanding what makes stars explode.
"It seems that we haven't properly allowed for these sound phenomena in the core of the star when it collapses," he says.
"This might be like the death knell or the last alarm bell that something bad is about to happen."

Disabling a memory molecule in the brain lifts depression in mice as effectively as using antidepressants, researchers say
New fossils found in Australia tell us that enormous snakes evolved from predatory lizards like goannas, scientists say.
Palaeontologist Dr John Scanlon describes the well-preserved 25 to 20 million-year old snake skulls from the Riversleigh World Heritage site, in today's issue of the journal Nature.
"There's been quite a bit of controversy about what sort of lizards snakes evolved from," says Scanlon, of the Riversleigh Fossils Centre in Mount Isa.
He says one idea is that snakes evolved from small burrowing insect-eating lizards that lost their legs and developed an elongated body. 
Another idea is that snakes evolved from relatively large predatory lizards such as goannas.
Scanlon says he hopes the skulls, from a now extinct snake known as Yurlunggur, will settle the debate on the evolution of snakes.
The structure of the jaws and face prove that Yurlunggur, an Arnhem Land Aboriginal term for 'rainbow serpent', is a very primitive snake, says Scanlon.
"It has so many features in common with lizards rather than other modern snakes."
For example, Yurlunggur has a clear jugal bone, similar to a cheekbone, not present in modern snakes.
And, in particular, the skulls show the snake is more closely related to large predatory lizards than to smaller insectivorous ones, says Scanlon.
"It basically shows a relationship between the most primitive snakes and the varanoid lizards such as goannas and mosasaurs," he says, referring to the giant acquatic goannas that lived during the Cretaceous period.

The galaxy cluster Abell 2029 is composed of thousands of galaxies, shown in this xray image, and an amount of dark matter equivalent to more than a hundred trillion Suns
Dark matter particles are zooming around the universe a million times faster than anyone predicted, UK astronomers say.
They've calculated that this mysterious substance, which governs how stars and galaxies move, is moving at a speedy 9 kilometres per second.
The University of Cambridge researchers have also worked out how dark matter likes to clump together and surprising details of how hot it is, data essential in modelling how galaxies form.
A preliminary report is available on arXiv, the online website operated by Cornell University. 
Dark matter is mysterious because it doesn't emit radiation, making it difficult to spot. Indeed, no-one has detected it and not all scientists are convinced it exists.
"The best evidence for dark matter is that there are stars in our sky," says Professor Gilmore, director of the Institute of Astronomy at Cambridge, which made the latest calculations.
"Without it they'd be flying off into space."
Dark matter is the mass needed to hold stars in their given places as they move around galaxies; the faster they move the more mass is needed.
"Kepler and Newton were able to weigh the Sun just by knowing where Earth was and how fast it was moving," says Gilmore. 
"We did the same thing, only in three dimensions, finding the 'weight' of dark matter by measuring the place and speed of a very large number stars in several dwarf galaxies orbiting the Milky Way."
Hanging out in clumps
The results were surprising. Aside from their speed, the researchers calculated the smallest clump of dark matter that could exist, 1000 light-years across.
These results imply that dark matter is hotter than predicted, meaning that what astronomers call 'cold' dark matter may not be so cold after all.
At 10,000&deg;C it's still cool by astronomical standards. But it's warm enough to solve two problems that have plagued standard models of how galaxies form: that there are too few dwarf galaxies and why dark matter has not concentrated in the centre of galaxies.
Gilmore says he was initially wary of the results, which together seemed too simple to be plausible.
The discovery of a super-dim galaxy by Dr Beth Willman from New York University, gave the team an opportunity to successfully test its predictions.

Friendship may be just as important to some primates as it is for humans, new research suggests
Female baboons that suffer the loss of a close friend or relative turn to other baboons for comfort and support, according to a new study.
The study encompasses 14 years of observing over 80 free-ranging baboons in Botswana's Okavango Delta.
It provides the first direct evidence that certain animals mourn the loss of individuals, even when the rest of their social group remains intact.
The findings also suggest that friendship may be just as important to some primates as it is for humans. 
Researchers were particularly struck by the behaviour of one female chacma baboon (Papio hamadryas ursinus) named Sylvia.
She was described as "the queen of mean" and disdainful of other baboons until she lost her daughter, Sierra, to a lion kill. 
"In the week after Sierra died, Sylvia was withdrawn," says Dr Anne Engh, who led the project.
"When the other females were grooming and socialising, she tended to sit alone and rarely interacted even with her other relatives." 
Engh, a postdoctoral researcher in the Department of Biology at the University of Pennsylvania, adds:
"After a week or two of moping around, Sylvia suddenly initiated grooming with several low-ranking females. I think that they were as surprised as I was; they seemed awfully nervous at first. Eventually, Sylvia settled into close relationships with a very low-ranking female and with Sierra's daughter, Margaret." 
Relieving stress
Engh says that grooming is a friendly behaviour similar to two human friends chatting over a drink.
The activity seems to relax the participants to the point where it can lower stress hormone levels. Those levels rise in humans and baboons after a close friend or relative dies. 
The researchers measured a group of such hormones, called glucocorticoids, in Sylvia and 20 other females. Baboons that experienced losses had elevated levels of the hormones after the deaths. 
In humans, this is associated with bereavement, so it is likely that baboons also grieve their dead. 
The mourning animals then widened their social circles by approaching and grooming other females, even those that were beneath them in rank.
This appeared to help them cope with losses, since stress hormone levels significantly dropped afterwards.
The discovery, outlined in a recent Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences paper, underscores the importance of friendship.
"Humans and baboons who are more socially integrated have lower glucocorticoid levels," says Engh.
"Both the human research and our results highlight the importance of friendly social relationships in reducing stress.
"Female [baboons] usually have one or two close female friends that usually devote a large proportion of their grooming to each other, and they seem to enjoy spending time close together."
Engh also mentions that friendships form between male and female baboons. For those relationships, the female often grooms the male, while the male protects the female, and any infants that she might have, from predation and bullying baboons. 
No surprise there
Brian Craft, lead keeper at the Oakland Zooin California, says that he was not surprised by the findings. 
"Advanced relationships are seen in chimpanzees, bonobos, as well as baboons and other multi-social troops," Craft explains.
"Friendships, which may help to ease stress after deaths, can be beneficial to the troop as a whole, as they keep it cohesive. It also appears that friend selection among baboons and other primates is somewhat of a choice, as for humans, and is not just instinctive behaviour."

Simulation of small satellite galaxies orbiting and falling into a larger one 
Astronomers have released new evidence to show that a region of stars in our galaxy known as the Arcturus stream is the digested remains of what was once a neighbouring galaxy.
The evidence is among the first to come from the largest star study to date, with data from 25,000 stars just released at a US astrophysics workshop.
Dr Quentin Parker of Sydney's Macquarie University and the Anglo-Australian Observatory is head of data management at the international Radial Velocity Experiment, or RAVE, which uses Australia's UK Schmidt telescope.
Parker says the latest results provide a smoking gun for the argument that the Milky Way is a voracious cannibal that devours its neighbours.
"We've confirmed the Arcturus moving group as being a star stream, which indicates a disruptive galaxy spiralled into our own," he says.
"Ours is a large galaxy and it has been eating other galaxies; it's been hungry. We can see what it's eaten by the crumbs that are left over from its meal."
It's another bit of evidence for the now widely accepted cannibal, or accretion, theory of galactic evolution, Parker says.
According to this theory, the gravitational pull of large galaxies sucks in smaller ones, making large galaxies like our own a sort of cosmic melting pot.
Parker says the RAVE measurements show stars in the Arcturus group are travelling at a similar velocity and in a similar direction through space, indicating they were once part of a coherent system.
"Using star velocities it's possible for the first time begin to unravel the way our galaxy is constructed," he says.
The RAVE study is measuring the speed of a million stars in the Milky Way using radial velocity, or the motion of a star along the line of sight between the telescope and the star.
The huge scope of the survey has been made possible by the six degree field (6dF) spectrograph on the 1.2 metre UK Schmidt Telescope at the Anglo-Australian Observatory, which can obtain spectroscopic information for up to 150 stars at once.
The telescope splits light from the stars into a wide spectrum of colours and by looking at specific colours produced by calcium atoms astronomers can work out whether the colours have 'shifted' in the spectrum.
This enables them to work out aspects of the star's movement.
"We're looking at the stars in our galaxy and measuring their velocity by measuring how their lines have shifted," Parker says.
The survey has so far collected information about 90,000 stars and will release data on the remaining 65,000 as it's analysed.

The cane toad front is moving across Australia five times faster than it was in the 1940s
The invasion of the dreaded cane toad across Australia has taken a new turn with research showing the toxic toads are evolving longer legs that allow them to move faster.
This means they can encroach even faster on new territory, biologists say in today's issue of the journal Nature.
Cane toads (Bufo marinus) were introduced to Australia more than 70 years ago to control insect pests in cane fields. And their toxic nature and invasiveness have made them a major ecological menace.
The toads have expanded to cover more than a million square kilometres of the continent and are now progressing at a rate five times higher than in the 1940s to 1960s.
Professor Richard Shine from the University of Sydney and team stationed themselves at the invasion front 60 kilometres east of Darwin.
They then waited for the toads, which can travel almost two kilometres a night, to arrive. 
Measurements revealed that the 'super athletes' at the front of the pack had longer legs than those at the back.
Why are their legs longer?
Shine says there are two "possible" and "probable" explanations as to why toads at the front have longer legs.
The first is the conventional evolutionary reason, that there are advantages to being at the front.
Toads with longer legs have the first access to virgin territory full of juicy grubs, so the evolving species is favouring this characteristic.
The second explanation is more immediate and practical.
"These guys sort themselves out spatially because the only ones that can be at the front are the fast ones," says Shine.
Put simply, if the faster ones with the longest legs were at the back, they would trample the shorter slower ones ahead.
"So even if there is no evolutionary advantage to being at the front you are still going to end up with the front guys being the fast movers," he says.
Understanding the enemy
Shine says understanding the enemy is the first step in combating the toads in the future.
"People tend to take a very straightforward view that cane toads are bad and we just have to work out ways to kill lots of them. But history is telling us that that doesn't work that well," he says.
"What we need to do is find what kind of animal toads really are, what bits of the landscape they use, how they use it and what they depend on."

A new type of pulsar that spits out radio waves intermittently, rather than regularly, has been discovered
Scientists have discovered a strange new type of pulsar that emits intermittent bursts of radio waves. 
And there are lots of them out there. 
In a paper in the journal Nature today, an international team of astronomers estimates there could be up to half a million of these weird flashing 'dead' stars.
The scientists are calling them RRATs, or rotating radio transients.
Unlike ordinary pulsars, which can emit regular pulses of radio waves, RRATs emit short millisecond bursts of radio waves in between dark spells that may last several hours. 
This makes them very difficult to find, says co-author Dr Dick Manchester, from CSIRO's Australia Telescope National Facility, who has been hunting pulsars with the Parkes Radio Telescope for the past seven years.
"These things are so sporadic that most searches, like the survey we conducted, would have missed them. We only looked at each patch of the sky for 35 minutes so we were lucky to find any," he says.
"This means there must be a huge population out there, many more than ordinary pulsars." 
While there are about 100,000 ordinary pulsars in the Milky Way, astronomers estimate there are at least 400,000 RRATs.
This latest research could mean that scientists will have to come up with new ideas for the way so many RRATs have formed. 
Birth of a pulsar
Pulsars are believed to be formed in supernovae, the cataclysmic explosion that signals the end of the life of a massive star.
As the core collapses to a superdense neutron star it spins very rapidly, sending a beam of radiation that sweeps out like a searchlight.
If the beam is pointing towards Earth each 'pulse' can be detected, hence the name pulsar.
"We knew that RRATs were pulsars, even though the pulses were isolated, just a single burst and then they might shut up for an hour or two," says Manchester.
"But it was only by timing them over a four year period that it was realised that they had much longer periods than normal and that they were slowing down."
Magnetic, reborn or just plain weird?
The paper suggests that RRATs are young super magnetic pulsars barely 100,000 years old.
But Manchester is not ruling out the possibility that they may be 'zombies', old pulsars suddenly brought back to life by growing magnetic fields or ordinary pulsars radiating in an unusual way.
"That's what makes it exciting," he says. "There are so many possibilities."

Women value a good sense of humour in a potential male partner, even if his jokes are crass. But men don't rate humour so highly in women, new research shows
It's a trait often requested in lonely hearts ads and scientists have now shown that a good sense of humour is important for women, but not men, in choosing a romantic partner. 
A woman is even willing to overlook other shortcomings in a man if he can make her laugh, North American researchers say in the journal Evolution and Human Behavior. 
"Our results suggest that humour can positively affect desirability as a relationship partner but this effect is most likely to occur when men use humour and are evaluated by women," says Dr Eric Bressler, an assistant professor at Westfield State College in Massachusetts. 
Bressler and Canadian researcher Dr Sigal Balshine, an assistant professor at McMaster University in Ontario, demonstrated in an experiment that a good sense of humour, or GSOH as it appears in personal ads, does make a difference. 
They showed groups of women pictures of two equally attractive men and presented autobiographical statements that were either funny or serious. 
After reversing the experiment and showing groups of men photographs of two women, they asked both sexes to select who they would choose as a romantic partner.
The humorous people were seen as more socially adept but less trustworthy, honest and intelligent. Men did not select the funny person but women did. 
"Women chose funny men as relationship partners despite often rating them as less honest and intelligent," the researchers say.
Funny men were preferred even if their humour was unsophisticated, the researchers add.

Can censoring scientists be justified? No, according to the CSIRO scientists who say they've been banned from talking to the public about aspects of climate change
Allegations the Australian government has pressured some of its top scientists to keep quiet about the implications of climate change are just the tip of the iceberg of scientific censorship, commentators say.
According to the claims, aired on ABC TV's Four Corners program last night, senior CSIRO scientists Drs Graeme Pearman, Barney Foran and Barrie Pittock were regularly gagged from commenting on so-called policy issues, such as greenhouse gas emission targets and environmental refugees.
But at least one expert says there are times where government censorship of scientific research is justified and may be necessary.
Dr Michael Selgelid, who lecturers in bioethics at the University of Sydney, questions whether scientists should be able to publish research that could endanger the public.
For example, information that could be used to make nuclear weapons is censored and "we've been living with that for the last 60 years", he says.
He says governments should similarly be able to block publication of research that provides information about making biological weapons.
"If someone discovers an easy way of making something that's just as dangerous and contagious as smallpox there would be really good grounds for censoring it despite the fact that free speech is important and that scientific openness is important."
He disagrees with suggestions that it should be a matter for journals to censor what they publish or for scientists to censor themselves.
"Scientists just don't have that kind of expertise and sometimes it's only the government that's going to have the information that's needed to do the risk assessment," he says.
Vested interests
Censorship is a different matter when it comes to the influence of vested interests, says Brian Martin, an associate professor in science, technology and society at the  University of Wollongong, who has published articles on the suppression of dissent in science.
He says this form of censorship is alive and well in Australia.
"In all my studies the thing that stands out is that a few cases that have become prominent. But for every one of those these's at least 10, maybe as many as 100 other cases which never receive any publicity," he says. 
Dr Mark Diesendorf is a former CSIRO chief scientist and is now a senior lecturer in environment studies at the University of New South Wales.
He accuses CSIRO of gagging him during the 1970s and 80s when he was involved in renewable energy research.
He says history is repeating itself with the latest allegations and with CSIRO's recent decision to move away from renewable energy research.
"Everyone at [CSIRO is] terrified the federal government will cut their budget unless they do exactly as they're told that and suppression of the [atmospheric research scientists] is well know to us who work in the energy policy field," he says.
A spokeswoman for CSIRO declined to comment, saying "I don't think we can possibly comment on something that happened 20 years ago."
She also describes Diesendorf's comments on a fear of budget cuts as "absolute rubbish".
Withholding funding
Diesendorf says withholding funding is another form of censorship, with many research grants now subject to ministerial approval and what he describes as unequal funding for Cooperative Reserch Centres (CRCs).
"There are three [CRCs] for fossil fuels [and] zero for renewable energy," he says.
"Research development for solar energy has shrunk, and there is no funding for windpower."
Diesendorf says he's particularly worried about what he describes as the "blatant muzzling" of scientists.
He says this means we risk policy decisions being made by vested interests such as big business, the military and powerful professions.
"Scientists are people who have expert knowledge so it means that policy decisions are made without expert knowledge or by the expert knowledge of vested interests only," he says.
"The very least we can expect in a democracy is that all sides have a right to present evidence that's relevant to policy."
Martin says we should be very worried about scientific censorship because it can affect human life.
"With climate change we're talking about risk to future generations. It's something that society should be paying attention to, it should be put on the agenda without fear or favour."
But censorship doesn't appear to be a universal experience for scientists.
"I have never been gagged about what I say to the media," says Monash University's Professor Patricia Vickers-Rich in a response to a poll by the Australian Science Media Centre.
"This is not a problem for this scientist. And that relates not only to issues on climate change, but also on issues relating to intelligent design, population, AIDS and I am frequently vocal on these issues."

Babies have an innate ability to do simple maths. While counting toes is beyond them, then can match voices to the number of people in a room
Even before babies learn to talk they have a bit of a grasp of maths, according to new research concluding that infants may have an abstract sense of numerical concepts. 
The US research, published in the latest issue of Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, says seven-month-old babies demonstrate an ability to match the number of voices they hear to the number of faces they expect to see. 
The study of 20 infants by researchers at Duke University was similar to a previous experiment to demonstrate that monkeys show numerical perception across senses. 
In the new study, babies listened either to two or three women simultaneously saying the word 'look'. 
At the same time, the infants could choose between video images of two or three women saying the word. 
As they had found with the monkeys, the researchers say the babies spent significantly more time looking at the video image that matched the number of women talking. 
"As a result of our experiments, we conclude that the babies are showing an internal representation of 'two-ness' or three-ness' that is separate from sensory modalities and thus reflects an abstract internal process," writes researcher Dr Elizabeth Brannon, an assistant professor in psychological and brain sciences. 
"These results support the idea that there is a shared system between preverbal infants and nonverbal animals for representing numbers," she says. 
"What we do know is that somehow, very quickly, [the babies] acquire this ability to perceive number and divorce it from the sensory information." 
Understanding the research could be useful in devising methods for teaching basic maths skills to the very young, Brannon says.

The hormonal changes that teenage girls go through when they start their periods may explain why they have trouble sleeping
Adolescent girls appear to be at greater risk of insomnia after they begin menstruation, a study has found.
This suggests that hormonal changes play a role in developing the sleep disorder, the researchers say in the journal Pediatrics. 
Researchers found that among more than 1000 13- to 16-year-olds in the study, nearly 11% had suffered insomnia at some point.
Insomnia, based on formal clinical criteria, was defined as problems falling asleep or staying asleep at least four times a week for a month or longer. 
Typically, the study found, the teens started having sleep disturbances around the age of 11.
Before menstruation, girls were about as likely as boys to have insomnia.
But after they began their menstrual periods girls had more than twice the risk of insomnia as boys.
The findings suggest that the hormonal changes that come with menstruation contribute to girls' insomnia risk, according to the authors. 
Such a physiological reason is one of two broad explanations for why menstruation would be related to insomnia, says lead author Dr Eric Johnson. 
The other possibility is that the physical changes that come with puberty, like breast development, create "social pressures" that contribute to sleep problems, says Johnson, a researcher with RTI International.
But he says menstruation is related specifically to problems with staying asleep and getting enough deep sleep. 
These forms of insomnia are more likely to have physiological causes, whereas problems with falling asleep in the first place can often be stress-related. 
In addition, girls' higher risk of insomnia was not explained by higher rates of depression, which is often marked by sleep disturbances. 
A long lasting problem
Another key finding, Johnson says, is that of all teens who ever suffered insomnia, 88% also had symptoms at the time of the study. 
This, he says, signals that the problem is lasting for many teenagers. 
"Insomnia seems to be common and chronic among adolescents," Johnson and his colleagues conclude. 
Given the consequences of sleep deprivation among teenagers, including blunted mental acuity, poorer school performance, and even poorer physical and emotional health, prevention and treatment may need to become "important priorities", the researchers say. 
Therapies for insomnia include lifestyle changes to promote sleep, like getting to bed and rising at regular times each day, cognitive behavioral therapy and sleep medications.

A voodoo follower at an international celebration of voodoo spirituality in the West African country of Benin earlier this year
Priests who tear out the throats of live chickens in ritual sacrifices to voodoo gods may risk contracting bird flu now the deadly virus has reached Africa. 
Voodoo priests in Benin, which borders Nigeria where an outbreak of the deadly H5N1 virus was found in poultry last week, sacrifice animals to invoke blessings or favours from the gods. 
Officials in the tiny West African country, which is the home of the ancient religion, say spreading the word about bird flu may help to save the lives of voodoo devotees. 
"We have identified the groups at risk, including fetishists and followers of the voodoo cult who sometimes kill animals with their teeth," says Guillaume Hounsou-ve, director of livestock at Benin's agriculture ministry.
Sheep, goats and other animals are sometimes sacrificed, but the favourite offering is a chicken.
Priests commonly kill birds by ripping their throats out with their teeth or using a knife to cut their heads off.
Both methods would bring them into contact with chicken blood, one of the ways bird flu is thought to be spread to humans. 
The disease has killed more than 90 people in Asia and Turkey since 2003. 
Hounsou-ve and other senior officials in Benin have spent the past few days drafting an action plan to counter bird flu. 
"We will target our messages, above all in regions where there are 'convents'," says Hounsou-ve, referring to the houses used for voodoo rituals. 
A common practice
An estimated 60% of Benin's 7 million people practise voodoo, although many also follow other religions like Christianity or Islam. 
Voodoo convents are found across Benin but more commonly in southern areas near the Atlantic seaboard. 
Once known as the Slave Coast, many thousands of Africans were shipped from here by European traders during more than three centuries of slave trading.
Many took their voodoo beliefs with them to the New World, notably Haiti, where rites and traditions from different parts of Africa met and evolved. 
Voodoo in West Africa and the Caribbean encompasses a wide range of rituals, from sacrificing animals to dancing, in which devotees fall into trances said to be a form of possession by gods.

Is the court making different rules for copyright protection in the online world?
Record companies are being given the power to veto the design of new digital communication technologies, say advocates of online civil liberties.
The claim, by Electronic Frontiers Australia (EFA), comes on the eve of an appeal against a landmark ruling last year against providers of the internet file-sharing software Kazaa.
Kazaa is one of a number of free software packages that allow people to swap files over the internet.
Record companies complain that such peer-to-peer file-sharing software leads to people illegally downloading their copyrighted music.
And last year they took the providers of Kazaa software to the Federal Court of Australia.
The court found the providers guilty of "authorising" copyright infringement by encouraging millions of users to download music from artists ranging from Powderfinger and Radiohead to Christine Anu and Robbie Williams.
The court also ordered the providers of Kazaa to modify the software to contain filters that would make it difficult for users to search for copyrighted works specified by the record companies.
On Monday 20 February, the providers of Kazaa will appeal against this decision. And the EFA, with the New South Wales Council for Civil Liberties and the Australian Consumers' Association, is applying to take part in the appeal.
EFA is also worried that this Kazaa ruling could one day lead to email providers inappropriately monitoring, filtering or blocking messages.
Concerns
Record companies focus on the illegal uses of peer-to-peer file-sharing software. But EFA is worried last year's Kazaa ruling, and the order to modify the software, will hinder people who want to use it legally.
It says filtering may catch files that are not infringing copyright, for example music already in the public domain or music deliberately distributed free by independent music groups.
And EFA also doesn't think record companies should be able to control the design of new digital communication technologies.
"If this type of precedent is allowed to stand," says EFA vice-chair, Dale Clapperton, "it's essentially going to give the record labels a veto power over the development of new technology."
The Australian Recording Industry Association (ARIA) disagrees.
"No-one who read the judgement could form this view," an ARIA spokesperson says. "The operators of Kazaa did not even suggest this."
ARIA also rejects claims that filters will stop legitimate downloads.
"A well-constructed filter that targets infringing files will have no effect on legitimate files on the Kazaa system," the ARIA spokesperson says.
A new precedent
Clapperton says last year's Kazaa ruling shows the court is treating online copyright infringement in a different way to past infringements.
He says when a court first found an Australian university library guilty of authorising copyright infringement by allowing students to photocopy books, it ruled that libraries should put up warning signs.
"The court didn't ban the photocopiers, it didn't order that the photocopiers should be modified to reduce the potential that they be used for infringing purposes," says Clapperton.
Similarly, he says, video recorder were not banned when movie studios complained that they could be used to infringe copyright when taping television programs.
"If they'd succeeded, we wouldn't have [video] machines today and we would almost certainly not have things like iPods."
Stifling innovation?
EFA says it's early days for digital communication software, and if providers are made responsible for how their product is used this could reduce competition.
"You could end up with a situation where the only people who produce products are the ones already tied in with the music labels," says Clapperton.
"It really is going to stifle the development of new technologies."
ARIA rejects these claims.
"There is no evidence that there is any reduction in competition or innovation following the decision," says the spokesperson. "The opposite has happened with the launch of many more digital download services including iTunes."
Other possible impacts?
EFA chair Matt Black is adamant the Kazaa case should be overturned because the precedent could affect email providers, instant messaging and even Google.
Black says software like Gmail has the capacity for large files to be transferred via the internet and if the principle of the Kazaa ruling is applied here, you may see Google, which runs Gmail, filtering email.
"Then you're looking at a situation where very important communications are being monitored, filtered and potentially blocked inappropriately by your email provider."

There's more to the flow of water down terraces like these than meets the mathematician's eye
A mathematical equation that attempts to model the distribution of water in rice terraces has convinced one researcher that the Western notion of maths has a lot to learn from other cultures.
Mathematician Willy Alangui of the University of the Philippines Baguio spoke about his attempt to model rice terrace irrigation this week at the Third International Conference on Ethnomathematics in Auckland, New Zealand.
Alangui has been studying irrigation in a network of rice paddy terraces built by the indigenous Kankanaey people of the Northern Philippines.
"I'm trying to understand how water is efficiently distributed in all the paddies," says Alangui.
The paddies are contained by stone walls and farmers ensure everyone gets enough water by opening and closing inlets and outlets as the water flows from the top terraces to the bottom.
Alangui developed an equation to model the dynamics of water distribution.
The model took account of variables such as the amount of water flowing into the system, the rate of evaporation and the size and elevation of the paddies.
"For me as a mathematician it explained nicely the dynamics that goes on in the distribution of water in the whole network of paddies," he says.
But when he went back to validate the variables he had used with the Kankanaey people he found his model was seriously flawed.
It failed to account for one major factor that governs the Kankanaey rice irrigation system: the ethic of co-operation.
The social responsibility factor
Alangui found out the system depended on a notion of "social responsibility". 
Even when water was scarce, people upstream shared water equally with those downstream because they had helped to build the irrigation system in the first place.
This told him the system would fail if the paddy owner at the top of the hill took more water than was fair.
Alangui says the failure of his model to capture the ethical dimension of the irrigation system told him that he needed to broaden his perspective as a mathematician.
In the PhD thesis, Alangui will try and modify the model to include this ethic although, he says, it may not be possible.
"My mathematics may be deficient," he says. "It's not the be all and end all of everything. It's just one way of looking at the world."
Ethnomathematics
Alangui thinks Western mathematics has a lot to learn from other cultures, hence his interest in ethnomathematics, the connections between mathematics and culture.
He says Western mathematics has become "powerful" and "arrogant" as a field and marginalised other perspectives.
Maori culture, for example, has a different concept of numbers, says Alangui. While western culture uses the number 'three' as an adjective, in for example the phrase 'three glasses', Maori talk of glasses interacting with each other, and as being in the act of 'three-ing'.
In Kankanaey culture, he says, there is no concept of a circle as a static object, defined by a centre and a radius. Rather, there is the concept of 'encircling', in which a circle is defined as point moving around a circumference.
Alangui says mathematicians should ask why the static version of numbers or circles has come to dominate. Interrogating long-held assumptions like this could lead to different and useful concepts in maths, he says.
He says hyperbolic and elliptic geometry were developed when mathematicians questioned the assumption of Euclidian geometry that two parallel lines never meet.
Alangui is a member of the Kankanaey people and has a masters degree in pure maths.

Light from Saturn's rings illuminates the storm, where lightning strikes are 1000 more powerful than ones on Earth
For nearly a month, a huge storm with massive lightning has been raging on Saturn under the watchful eye of the Cassini spacecraft. 
It was a Cassini ear, a radio receiver, that first detected the storm on 23 January. And this week, scientists finally coaxed an image from Cassini's camera. 
Sunlight reflecting off the planet's rings provided enough light during the Saturn night for Cassini's camera to pick out the storm and cloud features.
Researchers now are working hard to identify spots within the storm that could be lightning. 
The only other place in the solar system besides Earth where lightning has been positively identified is on Jupiter. 
"Cassini's radio detector is on all the time," says planetary meteorologist Professor Andrew Ingersoll, with the California Institute of Technology and a member of the Cassini science team.
"Months go by and there is no radio noise from Saturn. Then all of a sudden, in the space of a day, they get it. That's what happened on 23 January." 
The radio emissions are similar to the popping and crackling that you might hear if you were driving through a thunderstorm with an AM radio on.
What is generally thought of as radio interference is actually radio waves generated by lightning. 
Behind the storm
Scientists are not sure what causes the lighting on Saturn, but they believe it is triggered by the same process that creates lightning on Earth. 
"On Earth, we think the convection in thunderstorms is important in the process of separating positive charges from negative charges. And if you separate enough charges, you build up a very large potential field between those separated charges," says University of Iowa's Dr Bill Kurth, the deputy principal investigator of Cassini's radio and plasma wave science instrument. 
"Nature doesn't like that, and it tries to correct the situation by running a current between the two separated charges. That forms a very large spark, there's an awful lot of energy that's released, and it's meant to basically allow the negative charges and the positive charges to get back together again," Kurth says. 
On Saturn, the phenomena manifests itself on a gigantic scale, with lighting bolts more than 1000 times stronger than strikes on Earth, the radio data reveals. The storm itself spans an area larger than continental US. 
Why Saturn should have such massive storms is a mystery. The planet gets only about 1% of the sunlight that reaches Earth, so there is much less energy to drive storms, Ingersoll says.
"Given that, there are two possibilities: one is that you have the same number of storms that you have on Earth, but they are weaker; or two, they are just as strong but there are fewer." 
While more studies are needed, Ingersoll favours the second explanation.
"This storm certainly looks more vigorous and the radio emissions are more powerful deep down, [so] there may be more water in the atmosphere than on Earth," Ingersoll says. 
Amateurs beat the professionals
The first images of the storm actually came from two ground-based amateur astronomers, not the Cassini spacecraft. 
From its present orbital perch, Cassini has been unable to image the sunlit side of Saturn.
The team studying the radio emissions, however, decided to ask the amateur astronomy community if anyone had any pictures of Saturn that corresponded to where radio emissions were coming from. 
Within hours, two astronomers near Paris submitted the first visual confirmation of the storm. 
Their findings were confirmed by the Cassini images shot in darkness with illumination from the planet's rings.

Buying a house? New research shows it's best for our unconscious to work on big decisions
When faced with a major decision, such as buying a car or a house, it's best to do your homework, then forget about it for a while and let your unconscious churn through the options.
According to the results of a novel study published today in the journal Science, unconscious deliberation may lead to a more satisfying choice than mere conscious deliberation alone, at least for major decisions. 
Conscious deliberation is fine for the less important, more mundane everyday choices like deciding which shampoo or towels to buy, but not for bigger decisions, the report indicates. 
Four investigators in the department of psychology at the University of Amsterdam, confirm the value of what they call the "deliberation-without-attention" hypothesis in a series of studies on consumer choice.
The did the experiments in the laboratory and in real life among shoppers in department stores. 
Decisions, decisions
For example, in a car-shopping experiment, participants read a complex series of facts about cars they were thinking of buying. Immediately afterwards, they were given puzzles to keep their conscious selves busy. 
After working on the puzzles, this group of shoppers reported greater satisfaction with their car choice than the people who were given no puzzles and had to decide which car to buy immediately after consciously pondering the facts. 
But for making simple decisions, such as choosing between different sets of towels, conscious deliberations were all that was needed to make satisfying choices. 
There are several possible reasons why conscious thought sometimes leads to poor judgment, the researchers say. Consciousness has a "low capacity" causing individuals to consider only a subset of relevant information and they may inappropriately weight the importance or relevance of this information. 
In contrast, the human subconscious has a higher capacity to integrate more information, which can lead to better choices. 
First, gather all the information
"The take-home message is that when you have to make a decision, the first step should be to get all the information necessary for the decision," says author Dr Ap Dijksterhuis.
"Once you have the information, you have to decide, and this is best done with conscious thought for simple decisions, but left to unconscious thought, to 'sleep on it', when the decision is complex." 
The novel finding from these studies is the "idea that we can think unconsciously and that unconscious thought is actually superior to conscious thought for complex decisions", the researcher adds.

Poultry farmers burn chicken carcasses in Nigeria, a country that has just started investigating suspected human cases of the H5N1 bird flu virus. Now scientists are preparing for a worst-case scenario: a human bird flu pandemic
A human vaccine against the deadly H5N1 strain of bird flu virus has successfully passed the first stages in testing its safety and effectiveness, reports the manufacturer.
The trial, carried out at the Murdoch Childrens Research Institute with the University of Melbourne and the Royal Adelaide Hospital, recently tested a vaccine made by CSL Ltd of Melbourne.
CSL today announced that the vaccine triggered an immune response it predicts will equate with "a good level of protection" in "about half" of the 400 healthy adult volunteers tested. 
And, says Dr Andrew Cuthbertson, CSL's chief scientific officer, the participants got little more than the odd sore arm.
"It was very reassuring in a safety sense."
The vaccine was based on a deactivated virus originally taken from a Vietnamese patient. 
It was then grown up in fertilised chicken eggs, killed and mixed with an aluminium phosphate adjuvant before being given to volunteers.
Cuthbertson says the trial found immune stimulation occurred at two antigen doses of 7.5 microgram and two of 15 micrograms, although greater stimulation occurred at the double 15 microgram dose, which is the dose used in normal flu shots.
While it is generally assumed the higher the immune stimulation, the greater the protection, Cuthbertson says no one knows yet precisely what immune level will protect. 
Further safety and efficacy studies
CSL says it now plans to organise a second trial to study the safety and effectiveness of the vaccine in 800 other healthy volunteers, in particular children and older people who respond differently to vaccines.
It also plans to test the impact of higher doses of vaccine to clarify the dose that gives the best immune response.
He hopes the vaccine could be registered some time in the first half of 2007.
But, says Cuthbertson, if the vaccine is eventually registered, it will be a matter for governments and regulatory agencies to decide the lowest dose that can protect the most number of people.
How ready are we?
CSL says if a bird flu pandemic arrived now, and it was directed by the government to do so, they would be able to produce the vaccine as it is in six weeks.
But, if the pandemic strain mutated from the H5N1 to a strain more readily transmitted to humans, he says the time frame could be stretched.
"If [the virus] was not too different we would proceed to crank out as much vaccine as possible of the one that we made already," says Cuthbertson.
If it was very different CSL would have to switch to making a new vaccine and this would take another six weeks.
Cuthbertson says registering a vaccine against the H5N1 strain will still save time even if the eventual pandemic strain is different because the Therapeutic Goods Administration has told CSL it would not have to repeat clinical trials.
"It's making the assumption that the safety profile and so forth will be similar," he says.
Other trials?
While there have been many attempts to make a vaccine around the world, there have been few results of clinical trials announced, says Professor Aileen Plant, chief executive officer of the Australian Biosecurity Cooperative Research Centre at Curtin University and a consultant to the World Health Organization.
"It is exciting, really I don't think there's been anywhere else that's been able to get that sort of immunological response with two doses of 15 micrograms," says Plant, who also sits on the federal government's National Influenza Pandemic Action Committee.
She says a US trial last year that did not use an adjuvant had to give substantially more antigen to get an immune response, which means fewer people could be vaccinated.
Plant agrees that the vaccine could be used in an emergency, despite the missing data on children and elderly people.
"If the pandemic came tomorrow, the risks would be so high that we would say that it was worth going with it even if we didn't have the data."

Researchers have put insulin producing cells like this into tiny capsules as a treatment for type 1 diabetes
Encapsulating insulin producing cells in tiny seaweed bubbles and injecting them into people with type 1 diabetes could one day remove the need for daily insulin injections, an Australian researcher says.
Professor Bernie Tuch of the University of New South Wales launched a trial of the technology this week, using capsules made from the seaweed derivative alginate and measuring just 300 micrometres across.
Tuch says if the trial works, it will mean that insulin producing cells, or islets, can be transplanted, effectively reversing type 1 diabetes, without the need for immunosuppressive drugs.
This is because the capsules protect the transplanted cells from being sought out and destroyed by the body's immune system.
The capsules also contain tiny holes that let the insulin flow out while allowing oxygen and nutrients in.
"The concept of the seaweed is that it forms a coating around the islets with holes that are small enough to prevent immune cells entering," Tuch says.
The trial, involving a 51-year woman who was diagnosed with type 1 diabetes 40 years ago, is the first of its kind in Australia.
Tuch's team at the Diabetes Transplant Unit at Sydney's Prince of Wales Hospital has previously tested the method in animals.
An Italian group began a similar human trial two years ago but is using capsules made from a different material.
About 75,000 capsules
During Monday's half-hour procedure the woman was injected with 75,000 capsules containing a total of around 200,000 islet cells.
The islets had been isolated from a cadaver and put into the capsules in a procedure Tuch compares to blowing soap bubbles.
"There's the alginate, there's your cells and there's air," he says.
"You blow the air and the alginate and the cells together and it's like blowing soap bubbles; they come out with the cells inside the capsules."
The capsules were injected into the patient's abdomen where it's hoped they will start producing insulin within 24 hours, allowing her to slowly begin reducing her insulin injections. 
Tuch says one injection could potentially last a lifetime although it's not yet known whether the current patient will need extra injections.
What could go wrong?
Immunologist Dr Bronwyn O'Brien, who is working with a team from the University of Technology Sydney to genetically engineer liver cells so they produce insulin, says Tuch's method is promising but may have complications.
"In practice one of the big problems is that often islets that are in the centre of the capsule become hypoxic, they're not getting oxygen, and they die," she says.
"The implications would be the cells would break up into possibly small enough pieces that could leave the capsule."
There's also a chance that immune cells could grow around the outside of the capsules, blocking the flow of insulin, she says.
And while the pores in the capsules are big enough to keep T cells and antibodies out, there's still a chance that cytokines, the so-called messengers of the immune system, will slip through and produce an inflammatory response.
Tuch acknowledges this risk and says the patient received anti-inflammatory drugs as a precaution.
"We don't anticipate there is going to be a major inflammatory response but if they do get in then the islets may be destroyed," he says.
Not just for diabetes
The concept of microencapsulation as a means of avoiding rejection drugs could apply to any transplant involving cells, Tuch says, and in particular stem cell therapies.
"The concept of using capsules is certainly something that is reaching its clinical testing and time will tell what it has to offer," he says.

The search for life on other planets is homing in on a handful of solar systems that resemble our own. But not everyone agrees this is the best approach
Astronomers looking for extraterrestrial life now have a short list of places to point their telescopes. 
They include nearby stars of the right size, age and composition to have Earth-like planets circling them, scientists say.
But cuts in US federal funding mean that private philanthropists, who pay for the bulk of their work, may find out first when and if extraterrestrial life is discovered, the astronomers told a meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Dr Margaret Turnbull of the Carnegie Institution of Washington released her top 10 list of potential stars to the meeting.
They will be the first targets of NASA's Terrestrial Planet Finder, a system of two orbiting observatories scheduled for launch by 2020.
"There are 400 billion stars in the galaxy, and obviously we're not going to point the Terrestrial Planet Finder at every one of them," says Turnbull. 
So, on behalf of NASA and the now independently funded Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence, or SETI, she narrowed down the list to stars that could have planets with liquid water orbiting them. 
"We want to see these habitable planets with our own eyes," she adds. So the star cannot be too bright, or it will obscure the planet. 
Variable stars, which grow hotter and cooler, probably would not be conducive to life, so they are thrown out, as are stars that are too young or too old. 
Some are too gassy to have spawned planets like Earth, which contains a lot of metal. Others have massive companions whose gravity could interfere with the steady conditions needed for life to evolve. 
Top 10 list
Turnbull's top 10 list includes 51 Pegasus, where in 1995 Swiss astronomers spotted the first planet outside our solar system, a Jupiter-like giant. 
Others include 18 Sco in the Scorpio constellation, which is very similar to the Sun; epsilon Indi A, a star one-tenth as bright as the Sun; and alpha Centauri B, part of the closest solar system to our own. 
"The truth is when looking at these so-called 'habstars', habitable solar systems, it is hard to really rank them. I don't know enough about every star to say which one is the absolute best one," Turnbull says. 
But Dr Carol Cleland of the University of Colorado argues that astronomers are limiting themselves by looking for planets that closely resemble Earth. 
"I actually think we ought to be looking for life as we don't know it," Cleland says.
She says life on Earth is all so similar, based on DNA made up of specific building blocks, that it is likely to have had a single origin.
Life elsewhere may be built from different ingredients, or structured very differently, she says.
Feeling the pinch
Dr Jill Tarter of the SETI Institute, set up after US government funding for the program was cut, says the current budget threatens other astronomical programs.
She says research and analysis budgets were cut by 15% in the fiscal year 2007 budget proposed this year by US President George W Bush. 
"In the case of astrobiology, the cut is to 50% of what it was in 2005," Tarter says. "We are facing what we consider an extraordinarily difficult financial threat." 
She says NASA once had a policy of what to do, who to call, and how to announce the news if someone detected a signal of intelligent life from space. 
"Today it is in fact a group of very generous philanthropists who will get the call before we get a press conference," Tarter says.
They include Microsoft co-founder Paul Allen and Microsoft chief technology officer Nathan Myhrvold.

Some children with autism really can empathise with others, researchers say
People with autism are more intelligent and able to function better than previously believed, experts say.
But mistrust of doctors, biased tests and the internet have bred myths about the condition.
At a meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, researchers presented reports showing that even people with autism who do not speak can have above-average intelligence.
They also offered additional studies disputing claims that vaccines can cause autism. 
"The current figures are that 75% of autistic people are mentally retarded, with the mute the most impaired," says Canadian researcher Dr Laurent Mottron, an autism researcher at Montreal's H&ocirc;pital Rivi&egrave;re-des-Prairies. 
But Mottron believes the wrong intelligence tests are used to assess autistic children.
Many are tested using the Wechsler scale, a common IQ test that includes questions about words and concepts learned in school. 
The Raven's Progressive Matrices test measures abstract reasoning and consistently gives autistic children higher scores, Mottron says. 
The average boost in score is 30 points, Mottron says, enough to put someone previously considered mentally retarded into the normal range and the average to gifted status. 
Mottron was so impressed by the abilities of one autistic student, Michelle Dawson, that he made her a co-author of some of his papers. 
Autism is a term used to describe a broad range of symptoms, from an inability to use language normally, to exhibiting deeply disturbed and repetitive behaviours. 
Professor Morton Gernsbacher at the University of Wisconsin-Madison questioned a common idea among autism researchers that autistic people lack a 'theory of mind'. This, among other things, gives an ability to empathise with others.
Again, she says, the wrong tests are used to assess this ability. 
Is there an autism epidemic
Dr Judith Grether, a California epidemiologist, says she questions the idea that there is a new autism epidemic. 
She says it is impossible to find out how many cases of autism there were in the past, because many people with autism were often diagnosed as retarded, or never diagnosed.
Without that information, it is impossible to say if the number of cases has grown, she says. 
"We have to do the studies to find the answers," she says. 
Grether says US researchers have begun taking prenatal blood samples from pregnant women and will look for clues when and if some of their children are diagnosed with autism.
They are examining hormones, heavy metals, immune system proteins and other factors. 
The studies found no link with vaccines, says Dr Irving Gottesman, a psychiatrist at the University of Minnesota, but says the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has initiated four studies "to tie up the loose ends". 
New studies are focusing on genetic susceptibilities. 
Link with vaccines
Gottesman says the studies may help to ease the fears of parents that a vaccine-autism link has been covered up. 
But he says scientists are battling a plethora of websites devoted to the idea that mercury causes autism like http://www.safeminds.org. 
Gernsbacher, the mother of a child with autism, says some parents may join these lobbying groups over the advice of doctors because they get "pat answers" to initial concerns about their children.
Many may have been told that boys develop later than girls, for instance. 
"The mistrust [of government-funded studies and of their paediatricians] may have arisen from those kind of experiences," she says.

Leaves with jagged edges like these maple leaves allow better uptake of nutrients at the start of the growing season, when temperatures are cooler
Leaves with 'toothed' edges help trees, shrubs and other plants cope with the cold, US researchers say.
And studying leaves from ancient and existing plants could help to reveal past and present climates, they say in the current isssue of the International Journal of Plant Sciences.
They say these climates are critical for determining periods of global warming and other profound temperature changes. 
Dr Dana Royer, who authored the study with Dr Peter Wilf at Pennsylvania State University, says that the jagged, pointy edges on leaves are packed with xylem, a tissue that transports water and nutrients in sap.
Most of the liquid evaporates by leaving the teeth through minuscule pores. 
"In the springtime when leaves are just starting to leaf out, leaves with teeth are, on average, losing more water than leaves without teeth," says Royer, now an assistant professor of earth and environmental sciences at Wesleyan University. 
"This loss of water helps pull more sap up from the roots. Thus trees with toothed leaves probably have a higher rate of sap flow early in the spring than toothless leaves.
"This is important because it delivers nutrients to the developing leaves, helping to 'jumpstart' their photosynthetic season. As you move to colder and colder climates with shorter and shorter growing seasons, it becomes increasingly beneficial to have teeth," he adds. 
What transpires?
The researchers measured such moisture evaporation, or transpiration, and photosynthesis activity for leaves on 60 woody species from two regions with differing climates: Pennsylvania and North Carolina. 
They determined that both energy-gathering activity and transpiration increased at jagged leaf edges by up to 45% during the first 30 days of the spring growing season. Leaves without teeth did not exhibit such a marked increase. 
The scientists also found that plants native to colder climates, like those in Pennsylvania's south central York County, had toothy edges that were especially active. 
But possessing teeth may not always be advantageous for leaves since the teeth also promote more water loss. Plants in drier regions seem to be better off if they have fewer teeth or are toothless. 
Not everyone agrees
Another theory, proposed by Taylor Field at Taylor University, holds that leaf teeth serve as a sort of 'release valve' that prevents too much sap from collecting in the leaf. 
Professor Judith Totman Parrish, dean of the College of Science at the University of Idaho, says she thinks the jury is still out on why plants have leaf teeth. 
"I think the authors have identified a very interesting problem and have made progress toward trying to answer it. As to whether this is the ultimate answer, that remains to be seen with further studies, but the authors have kicked off a promising line of research," Parrish says.
Royer says the research is important because "we on Earth today are experiencing rapid climate change. A problem with trying to understand our current climate change is that it is an unreplicated experiment".

Physicians in the Middle Ages inspected urine by holding it up to the light
The colour of your urine can tell a lot about your health, says a researcher who's concerned that modern medicine is overlooking this time honoured diagnostic tool.
The Australian researcher says the ancient practice of examining patients' urine could help doctors to monitor medication, pinpoint disease and in some cases avoid costly and invasive tests.
Dr Carole Foot, an intensive care specialist at Queensland's Prince Charles Hospital, publishes a paper on what she calls the 'uroscopic rainbow' in the Postgraduate Medical Journal.
The ancient Greeks first diagnosed the rare blood disorder porphyria by observing colourful urine and even named the illness after the Greek word for purple.
Then in the Middle Ages, when urine analysis enjoyed its heyday, specimens were routinely examined in a matula, or urine glass, held up to the light.
Foot says urine analysis could help today.
She says the idea for the paper hit her after being on a ward round and discovering a number of patients had discoloured urine.
"Here we were with these highly sophisticated monitoring devices that tell us all sorts of things about our critically ill patients and here we are doing something as old fashioned as looking at urine," she says.
Urine in the hospital
Foot says urine can provide information about whether patients are taking certain medications or are being over-administered.
For example, propofol, a common sedative in critical care wards, turns urine pink if given in the right dose but green if patients are getting too much.
"That's a signal for us to think about reducing the amount of propofol we're giving," she says.
And the antibiotic rifampicin, used as an adjunct to other antibiotics and sometimes as a treatment for tuberculosis, turns urine and other secretions including tears, orange. This means it's being properly absorbed. 
"If you take a sample of urine and it's orange you know the patient's taking their tablets," Foot says.
"It certainly can be used as an agent to monitor compliance."
 Using urine to diagnose disease
Dark brown or tea coloured urine can indicate infection in patients who have undergone heart or valve operations because it suggests the patient is haemolysing, or breaking down red cells.
Urine that turns black when exposed to air can also be a sign of alkaptonuria, a rare enzyme disorder that causes abnormalities of the skin and cartilages. And gout can produce pink urine.
Foot says there are other ways of diagnosing these conditions today.
"But what's interesting is that the way a lot of these conditions came to be diagnosed was based on people back in the Middle Ages noticing abnormalities in the urine."
Using urine to rule out problems
Looking at urine can also help to rule out serious complications.
Foot says a GP who sees a patient with red urine may jump to conclusions about something sinister.
This is because red urine points to bleeding and blood in the urine almost always means something abnormal.
But a simple question could make it clear that the urine is red because a patient is menstruating.
Eating beetroot, blackberry and rhubarb can also turn some people's urine red while blue-green urine can also be a sign a patient is drinking too much mouthwash.
"I've seen people worked up about complex problems when they just didn't ask the patient something simple," Foot says.
What should your urine look like?
In a healthy person, urine ranges in colour from almost clear to bright yellow because of a pigment known as urochrome.
But once the urochrome becomes concentrated, urine can go dark yellow or brownish, which suggests it's time for a drink.
"It's a marker of hydration [which can] be used as a marker of whether you're drinking enough fluid, particularly in summer," Foot says.
But urine inspection isn't always fail-proof, she says, because individual urine pH levels and genetic factors can influence whether or not certain substances discolour it.

Circuit boards of the future could house smaller, more powerful chips made with existing technology
Current chip-making technology could make computer processors even tinier and cheaper than first thought, researchers have discovered.
Researchers at US technology firm IBM, who released their findings at a Silicon Valley technology conference, says the industry now has a reprieve from switching to more costly, unproven chip-making methods. 
The commonly-used process of optical lithography has the potential to make chip circuitry more than a third as narrow as is standard in electronics today, according to IBM.
This would mean a higher-density memory or higher memory capacity in a small package, the company says.
It will be up to chip producers to invest in developing the technology, according to the company. 
"Our goal is to push optical lithography as far as we can so the industry does not have to move to any expensive alternatives until absolutely necessary," says Robert Allen, a manager at IBM's Almaden Research Center in San  Jose. 
"This result is the strongest evidence to date that the industry may have at least seven years of breathing room before any radical changes in chip-making techniques would be needed." 
What's behind the push?
The discovery that computer components can be smaller, cheaper, and higher capacity than once thought came amid a worldwide technology push toward more versatile and compact handheld devices. 
IBM scientists have created the tiniest, high-quality line patterns ever made using deep-ultraviolet optical lithography, a technology currently used to  'print' circuits on chips. 
The distinct and uniformly spaced ridges are just under 30 nanometres wide, IBM says.
This is about one-third the size of the 90 nanometre features now in mass production and below the 32 nanometres that industry consensus held as the limit for optical lithography techniques, according to the researchers. 
What's Moore's law?
For decades, the semiconductor industry has relied on continually shrinking circuits to drive increases in the performance and function of chips and the products that use them, according to industry experts. 
As chip features now approach the fundamental scale limits of individual atoms and molecules, the future of this trend of relentless improvement, referred to as Moore's law, is in jeopardy, IBM scientists say. 
IBMs new result indicates that a 'high-index immersion' variant of lithography may provide a path for extending Moores law, buying the industry time.

Cyclones will affect more people as coastal populations boom, according to the latest scientific statement
Climate change can't be blamed for any of the events that made the past tropical cyclone season the worst in recent times, a report by a group of international experts says.
"No single high impact tropical cyclone event of 2004 and 2005 can be directly attributed to global warming," it says in a report submitted to the World Meteorological Organization's (WMO) Commission for Atmospheric Sciences, which is meeting in South Africa .
Dr John McBride is a principal research scientist at Australia's Bureau of Meteorology and reports to the WMO on the effects of climate change on tropical weather.
He is also chair of the international WMO committee that produced the report.
McBride says the report came as an attempt to separate fact from fiction in relation to recent controversy about the role of climate change in producing tropical cyclones.
McBride says there's no doubt that the latest season was the most ferocious in recent times, with a series of vicious cyclones including Hurricane Katrina that devastated New Orleans.
"These last two years were probably the most severe since the satellite era began [about 40 years ago]," he says.
But he says evidence linking this to climate change is inconclusive or lacking.
The case against climate change
A current argument suggests that as climate change causes the seas to warm the oceans store more energy that can be harnessed by the wind to form tropical cyclones.
But this is too simplistic, McBride says.
"There are other conditions that are necessary to be able to tap that energy source, such as the structure of the wind systems," he says.
McBride says there's no proof that cyclones have become more common or will become more frequent in the future, or that they'll take place in more parts of the world.
"Worldwide, there's really no evidence for any change," he says.
He says the report also questions claims that tropical cyclones have become more intense over the past 50 years, saying data used in the past may be inaccurate or incomplete because of limitations with the technology of the day.
The rising damage toll
McBride says it's true that the cost of cyclones, in terms of life and property, appears to be rising.
But he says this is because more people are living on the coast, not because cyclones are becoming more severe.
"There's a public perception that we're getting disasters everywhere and part of this is due to the fact that there are so many people living in vulnerable areas," he says.
"Given no change in tropical cyclone behaviour at all you will still get an increase in insurance damage and the financial scale of damage because of increasing coastal infrastructure."
Sea levels
What is of concern, McBride says, is strong evidence that sea levels are rising. 
In this way climate change may have an indirect effect on the potential for tropical cyclones to cause damage because of increasing storm surges from the sea.
This means that even if there is no change in tropical cyclones their potential to cause death and damage will increase if sea levels rise, he says.

Frogs produce a range of chemicals in their skins, including ones that smell like cashew nuts. Now scientists say some of these chemicals repel insects 
Some Australian frogs create their own insect repellent, some resembling rotten meat and others roasted cashew nuts or thyme leaves, researchers find.
The research team, which includes Associate Professor Mike Tyler of the University of Adelaide and entomologist Dr Craig Williams from James Cook University, publishes its findings online in the journal Biology Letters. 
Frogs produce a number of chemicals in their skin, including hallucinogens, glues and antimicrobials, to ward off infection and stop other animals from trying to eat them.
"We wanted to test Professor Tyler's [belief] that they should also produce an insect repellent," says Williams.
The research team studied five species of Australian frogs, including the Australian green tree frog.
Using massage and acupuncture techniques, they stimulated the muscles beneath the frogs' skins to produce secretions.
"What we found was that frogs produce a variety of chemicals in their skin and these ooze out of the pores of their skin when they are stressed," says Williams. 
The secretions, some of which repel mosquitos, have different smells depending on a number of factors such as what the frog eats.
"The frogs produce hundreds of chemicals and one frog's smell might be made up of six or seven different chemicals, so they all smell quite different," Williams says.
"The chemicals evaporate very quickly from the skin and it's the volatile smell that repels [the mosquitos]."
A new mosquito repellent?
The team found that skin secretions from an Australian green tree frog, for example, protected a mouse from mosquitos when the secretion was applied.
The researchers say this is the first time a vertebrate has been found to have its own in-built mosquito repellent.
But the frog secretion was not as repellent as DEET, diethyl-m-toluamide, the ingredient in most commercial mosquito sprays.
Williams doesn't believe that a new brand of natural insect repellent will result from the research. 
"The smell is just not very good some smell of rotting flesh, some of nuts, some of thyme leaves."
Last year the frog-sniffing research team won an Ig Nobel prize for its work on skin secretions.
The prizes honour "achievements that first make people laugh, and then make them think".
At the time, the researchers talked about frog smells that reminded them of Bombay curry and cut grass.

Most of the world's sharks live at depths that commercial trawlers can access, a new study shows
Ocean depths beyond 2000 metres are almost devoid of sharks, a finding that is grim news for these threatened fish, a study finds. 
An international team of researchers publishes its findings in the journal Proceedings of the Royal Society B.
The researchers used deep-sea trawls, baited hooks and baited cameras to see where sharks live, testing depths in the Atlantic, Pacific and Indian oceans and Mediterranean Sea from 471 to 5900 metres.
They generally saw or caught sharks at up to 2000 metres, but there were few sharks beyond this depth.
The deepest specimen was the leafscale gulper shark, caught at 3280 metres.
This means that there are no reserves of sharks living in the abysses, rarely-explored depths that are beyond 3000 metres that comprise 70% of the oceans' volume.
As a result, almost all sharks are within reach of modern deep-sea trawlers, which can net fish to a depth of up to 2300 metres. 
"Sharks are apparently confined to about 30% of the total ocean, and distribution of many species is fragmented around sea mounts, ocean ridges and ocean margins," says the paper, which mentions other chondrichthyes, a category that also includes skates and rays.
"All populations are therefore within reach of human fisheries, and there is no hidden reserve of chondrichthyan biomass or biodiversity in the deep sea.  Sharks may be more vulnerable to over-exploitation than previously thought."
Endangered or facing extinction
Of the 490 species of shark, 25 are endangered or facing extinction, according to the Red List of threatened biodiversity compiled by the World Conservation Union (IUCN). 
But this number is set to grow, in the light of new data assessed by the IUCN's group of shark experts, the Swiss-based agency says. 
Many shark species are very slow-growing, which means that a sudden drop in numbers can threaten their survival. 
Shark species have been ravaged by commercial trawling. They are scooped up accidentally as bycatch by trawlers hunting more lucrative fish, and are also being increasingly targeted for their fins, which are used for the Chinese  shark-fin soup, and for their liver, which is rich in oil. 
Some species of chondrichthyan fish have adapted to the extreme pressures and poor light of the deep ocean. 
The shark, though, seems to be excluded from life in the abysses because of a lack of food down there and the relatively high buoyancy of its liver, says the paper, by Professor Imants Priede of Scotland's University of Aberdeen.

Genes that govern aspects of social communication, human bonding and spirituality help to determine whether you'll make a good dancer, research suggests
Professional dancers are born with at least two special genes that give them a leg up on the rest of us, according to a new study.
Recent research also has suggested that intelligence, athletic ability and musical talent are linked to our genes and brain hard-wiring. 
With dancing added to the list, the evidence indicates that certain individuals are born with a predisposition to specific behaviours and talents, and that at least some of these qualities may represent evolved attributes. 
"I think that dancing is an evolved trait," says Professor Richard Ebstein, who led the study, published in a recent issue of the PLoS Genetics journal.
"Animals have courtship dances and I think that human dancing represents the further development of a very ancient animal trait," says Ebstein, a psychology professor at Hebrew University's Scheinfeld Center for Genetic Studies.
"Also the fact that dancing is universal and existed in all human societies, even those communities of man separated geographically by tens of thousands of years [Aboriginal Australians, native Americans, Africans, Eurasians] attests to the very early origin of dance in our evolution as a species."
First, find your dancers
Ebstein, doctoral student Rachel Bachner-Melman and their colleagues examined the DNA of 85 currently performing dancers and their parents.
They then did the same thing for 91 competitive athletes and 872 people who neither regularly dance nor often participate in sports. 
The scientists discovered that dancers tend to possess variants of two genes that are involved in the transmission of information between nerve cells. 
One of the identified genes is a transporter of serotonin, a brain transmitter that contributes to spiritual experience.
The second is a receptor of the hormone vasopressin, which many studies suggest modulates social communication and human bonding. 
"People are born to dance," says Ebstein. "They have [other] genes that partially contribute to musical talent, such as coordination, sense of rhythm. However, the genes we studied are more related to the emotional side of dancing - the need and ability to communicate with other people and a spiritual side to their natures that not only enable them to feel the music, but to communicate that feeling to others via dance." 
Ebstein believes some adults may possess the special gene variants, but they perhaps never nurtured the related skills or recognised their hidden talent. 
"Many of us surely have the ability, but for a hundred reasons never exploited that particular talent," he says.
Ebstein explained that the identified genes seem to be linked to every form of dancing, from tap to hula, since all usually involve social communication and connecting to music or rhythms.
Other factors to consider
Professor Irving Gottesman, a senior fellow in psychology at the University of Minnesota and an emeritus professor from the University of Virginia, is one of the world's leading experts on genes as they relate to human behaviour and psychology. 
Gottesman emphasises previous research has shown that genes are only one part of "complex causality" systems that make us who we are.
For example, he confirms that intelligence can be in our genes, but that socioeconomic considerations, such as a quality education, can have a greater influence on a person's intellect. 
Ebstein agrees that genes are not the whole story. He says those of us without a twinkle-toed predisposition can still become good dancers, since "it's not only a question of having the right genes, but also training and motivation, that make professional dancers".

Scientists have been inspired by the path of a free-falling ball to work out a crucial step in quantum computing
What can a quantum computer do? The answer is as simple as watching a ball free-falling under gravity, say Australian physicists.
They say the maths that describes a falling ball can be used to identify algorithms for quantum computers to work on.
Mark Dowling and colleagues at the University of Queensland report their argument in today's issue of the journal Science.
Some problems, like finding the factors of very large numbers, are beyond the capability of normal computers, says Dowling.
"A simple example would be 15. The factors are 3 and 5," he says. "But if I give you 256 billion nine hundred and whatever and ask you what numbers multiply to give that, that's a hard problem."
In general, a standard computer will require 10^n steps to find the factors of a number with 'n' digits.
This means that as a number gets bigger, the number of steps in the algorithm used to solve the problem increases exponentially and it becomes unfeasible to calculate.
But it is expected that quantum computers will be able to solve such problems more easily, using algorithms that do not have an exponential increase in steps as the number increases.
Quantum computers are only in their infancy right now, which is why internet commerce can rely on encryption codes based on factoring very large numbers to secure credit card details.
But as quantum computers mature, not only will this present a challenge for those involved in internet security, researchers will also want to put these powerful computers to more useful work than cracking codes.
Scientists have been looking for problems, like factoring, which would be suitable for a quantum computer to solve. But so far it's been a difficult task.
Now the Queensland researchers have found a surprising way of identifying quantum computer algorithms.
Geometric inspiration
Dowling and colleagues were inspired by the field of mathematics called Riemannian geometry, which helps to find the shortest path between two points in a curved space.
Picture a ball at the top of a hill in a hilly landscape about to travel from A to B.
The quickest path would be for the ball to fall freely from A under gravity, working its way down the hill to B.
Now imagine the hills are like steps in an algorithm. The bigger the hill, the more steps.
There may be many possible algorithms that solve a problem, or paths to get from A to B. But the ones with the least number of steps are equivalent to the path taken by the free-falling ball.
The researchers have found that the maths that describes the path of the free-falling ball can be used to identify algorithms suitable for quantum computer problems.
"It's a new route to finding problems that a quantum computer can do easily," says Dowling.
He says there are many problems that standard computers cannot solve and that may be candidates for quantum computing.
One such problem is the 'travelling salesman problem', which identifies the shortest route for someone visiting a large number of locations.

Pluto is in the centre and Charon is just below it. The new moons, P1 and P2, are to the right of Pluto and Charon
The tiny, distant and frozen planet Pluto, for 30 years believed to have just one moon, has two more satellites, US astronomers confirm.
They tentatively announced the discovery of the two moons last November.
Now they've confirmed their find, after spending six months analysing images from the Hubble Space Telescope and publishing their work in today's issue of the journal Nature.
Pluto's first known satellite Charon was not discovered until 1978. With a diameter of 1200 kilometres, it is half that of Pluto, abnormally large for a moon in relation to its planet.
Some scientists suspected Pluto had other, tiny moons. But at such a great distance from Earth, they have been hard to spot.
The two additional orbiting satellites, P1 and P2, are travelling outside the orbit of Charon and are tiny by comparison, say scientists led by Dr Hal Weaver of Johns Hopkins University.
P1, the more distant of the two from Pluto, has a diameter of between 60 and 165 kilometres while P2 is 20% smaller. 
"Although definitive orbits cannot be derived, both new satellites appear to be moving in circular orbits in the same orbital plane as Charon with orbital periods of about 38 days for P1 and 25 days for P2," they write. 
Charon's density is also very similar to that of Pluto's, which appears to back theories that the planet whacked into a large space object, causing a large chunk to break off and eventually be enslaved as a satellite. 
P1 and P2 may have resulted from the same collision, says Dr Alan Stern of the Southwest Research Institute in the same issue of Nature.
First with multiple satellites
The discovery of the two new members of Pluto's family make it the only object in the Kuiper belt, a vast region of rock and ice beyond Neptune that contains debris from the formation of the solar system, known to have multiple satellites, the scientists say.
The scientists also expect Pluto's small moons to generate debris rings of their own, from surface impacts.
"[This] would open up a whole new class of study because it would constitute the first ring system seen around a solid body rather than a gas giant planet," says Stern's colleague and co-author Dr Bill Merline.
Pluto was only discovered in 1930 and because of its vast distance from Earth has remained largely enigmatic ever since. 
It's some three billion miles from the Sun and the only planet not yet to have been visited by a spacecraft.
NASA's New Horizons mission, which was launched earlier this year, will be the first to take a detailed look at Pluto, in 2015, and the Kuiper belt by 2020.

Japanese people traditionally eat eel on the hottest days of summer to combat the heat. Seen here, restaurant owners inspecting their stock ahead of national Eel Day
An ancient mystery surrounding the Japanese eel, a species as prized by fishermen for its high price as it is by chefs for its delicate flesh, has been explained at last. 
Like its Atlantic cousins, the Japanese eel (Anguilla japonica) matures in freshwater but then migrates out to sea to spawn.
But where this act is carried out has, until now, been an enigma.
The answer, says a Japanese ocean researcher today in the journal Nature, lies in a tiny triangle of the Pacific Ocean about 2000 kilometres east of the Philippines, near underwater mountains west of the Mariana Islands.
There male and female eels gather in the waning moonlight in the middle of the year, luxuriating in the balmy tropical waters. 
University of Tokyo scientist Professor Katsumi Tsukamoto collected newly-hatched eels during a research trip aboard an oceanographic vessel, the Hakuho Maru, last year. 
The creatures were still in a microscopic larval state and could only be identified with a DNA test.
The scientist pinpointed their spawning site as 14&deg; north, 142&deg; east, to the west of the Suruga seamount in the southern part of the West Mariana Ridge.
The eels had hatched about four days before the new moon of June 2005. 
Just the spot
The site is cleverly chosen, because it enables the hatchlings to be carried northwestward on the Kuroshio Current, which flows towards the coastline of China and Japan where the eels mature in rivers and lakes. 
If the spawning were to occur only a little bit further south, the infant eels could get swept up in the Mindanao Current, which runs southwards down the eastern side of the Philippine archipelago. 
The love grounds of the Japanese eel are tiny when compared to those of its two Atlantic relatives, the European and American eels (A. anguilla) and (A. rostrata), which reproduce in the Sargasso Sea in the eastern Caribbean.
Grilled, steamed, grilled or baked, the eel is a delicacy in Japan, where it is known as unagi. 
Most eels sold for food come from aquaculture. But these eels come from wild eels that are caught and put in fish farms to mature in captivity. 
A surge in demand
As a result of surging demand and disruption to its reproductive cycle, catches of this species have fallen by three-quarters in the past 30 years, according to the UN Food and Agriculture Organization. 
The price of Japanese eel has soared over the past decade, prompting importers to turn to cheaper European eels to meet demand. 
In turn, this has encouraged dangerously unsustainable catches of European elvers, known as 'glass eels' because they are transparent for the first few years of their life.

Racalibration of the Earth's radiocarbon clock is changing what we know about when early humans colonised Europe
The ancestors of modern humans moved into and across Europe, ousting the Neanderthals, faster than once thought, a new analysis of radiocarbon data shows. 
Rather than taking some 7000 years to colonise Europe from Africa, the reinterpreted data shows the process may only have taken 5000 years.
Professor Paul Mellars from the University of Cambridge publishes his results today in the journal Nature. 
"The same chronological pattern points to a substantially shorter period of chronological and demographic overlap between the earliest modern humans and the last survivors of the preceding Neanderthal populations," the professor of prehistory and human evolution writes. 
The reassessment is based on advances in eliminating modern carbon contamination from ancient bone fragments and recalibration of fluctuations in the pattern of the Earth's original carbon 14 content.
University researchers have, for example, found better ways of preparing bone collagen for analysis. This involves a process of ultrafiltration, which removes contaminants with a lower molecular weight, such as organic salts and humic acids.
And taking into account the carbon signature of deep-sea sediments and ice cores, has allowed researchers to recalibrate radiocarbon ages.
Taking over the world
Populations of anatomically and behaviourally modern humans first appeared in the Middle East some 45,000 years ago and slowly expanded into southeastern Europe. 
Previously it was thought that this spread took place between 43,000 and 36,000 years ago.
But the re-evaluated data suggests that it actually happened between 46,000 and 41,000 years ago, starting earlier and moving faster. 
"Evidently the native Neanderthal populations of Europe succumbed much more rapidly to competition from the expanding biologically and behaviourally modern populations than previous estimates have generally assumed," Mellars writes. 
He says the invasion could have been helped by a major change in the climate that modern man would have been technologically and culturally better equipped to deal with than the more primitive Neanderthals. 
"There are increasing indications that over many areas of Europe, the final demise of the Neanderthal populations may have coincided with the sudden onset of very much colder and drier climatic conditions," Mellars writes. 
"This could have delivered the coup de grace to the Neanderthals in many parts of western and central Europe in their economic and demographic competition with the incoming modern groups," he adds.

Scientists have pinned down the genes responsible for the type of starch found in wheat
Researchers are making high-fibre wheat using gene silencing technology, but hope to use old-fashioned plant breeding methods to bring it to market.
They have used a genetic modification (GM) method known as RNA interference, or RNAi, to identify the genes responsible for high fibre.
But rather than marketing such a GM wheat, they plan to select for plants with the right genetic make up and breed them the conventional way.
Scientists from Australia's CSIRO and the French-based agricultural biotechnology company Biogemma UK report their findings today in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Science.
RNAi is a way of changing the expression of particular genes in plants, says author Dr Matthew Morell, a geneticist from CSIRO's Food Futures National Research Flagship.
The technology involves inserting a fragment of DNA into the wheat, a fragment similar to one of the plant's own DNA sequences.
This triggers the plant's defence system to search out and destroy the resulting RNA used to make a particular enzyme.
Usually, this enzyme would convert the starch molecule amylose to amylopectin. But if the gene that produces that enzyme is 'silenced', the wheat is higher in amylose.
Wheat higher in amylose is harder to digest, which makes it healthier, the scientists say.
It lowers the rate of blood sugar uptake and increases the passage of fibre into the large bowel, potentially reducing the risk of developing obesity, diabetes and bowel disease.
There are a number of enzymes that convert amylose to amylopectin and one of the important parts of the research was to identify the critical enzyme that needed to be silenced to give wheat with high-amylose starch.
The scientists did this by silencing a number of different enzymes in wheat, then testing the resultant starch. 
Rat tests
The team then fed the GM wheat to rats and compared its impact to that of standard wholemeal wheat. 
They report that the rats fed the GM wheat had more bowel contents and a lower bowel pH, indicating better gastrointestinal health.
The rats' faeces also had increased levels of short-chain fatty acids, which have been associated with a lower risk of colorectal cancer, the researchers say.
And, says Morell, the high amylose content of the wheat means it is potentially another tool for managing our diet's glycaemic index or GI.
The old-fashioned way
The team is not developing high-amylose GM wheat. Rather, it is using the information gained in this experiment to develop an equivalent non-GM variety.
"People, particularly in our major export markets, are still not accepting GM technology," says Morell. 
"So the major international wheat producers - countries like Australia, the US and Canada - are not willing to risk those markets at the moment by having GM crops."
The research so far has told the team the genes that are important in creating a high-amylose wheat. 
This will give them a shortcut to breeding a new variety using conventional breeding methods.
A technological shortcut
He says the new breeding program is already well under way but the details of when the new variety will be ready are commercial-in-confidence.
The technological shortcut, which cost several million dollars to research, will save decades in developing a high-amylose wheat variety, says Morell.
Without RNAi, which CSIRO developed about five years ago, scientists would have had to find and combine nine different very rare mutant wheat varieties, he says.

Ecstasy use has risen 70% between 1995 and 2000, says the UN
Ecstasy, the drug that some doctors blame for depression and anxiety, may often only enhance these symptoms rather than cause them, according to a study published today. 
Dutch researchers found that children who suffered from depression were more likely to go on to use the illegal drug when they grew up to make them feel better. 
The appearance later in life of mental health problems in these people might not therefore be primarily due to their use of ecstasy, but could reflect pre-existing conditions. 
"Using ecstasy may increase a risk that is already there," says Anja Huizink, assistant professor at the Erasmus Medical Center in Rotterdam, author of the study that appears in the British Medical Journal today.
"Other studies claim that ecstasy leads to depression," Huizink says. "Sometimes that is the case. But perhaps it is more the case that individuals who already have an increased risk for depression are more likely to use ecstasy." 
Clubbers
Ecstasy, methylenedioxymethamphetamine or MDMA, was used in the 1970s to treat depression.
It helps the body to relax, reduces inhibitions, increases energy and brings feelings of euphoria.
The drug is now used by millions of young people around the world, especially clubbers who say it can help them dance all night. 
United Nations data suggests the use of ecstasy surged by 70% between 1995 and 2000. 
But ecstasy has increasingly been linked with health problems such as depression, especially where individuals have used the drug heavily over a long time.
The Dutch study of 1580 individuals over 14 years left open the possibility that ecstasy might cause depression in some cases.
"Perhaps for individuals who did not display symptoms of depression and anxiety in childhood, using a lot of ecstasy may also cause depression. We are not saying that is not the case, but we need more studies," says Huizink. 
More than a decade later
She and her colleagues first looked at their sample in 1983, before ecstasy appeared as a recreational drug in the Netherlands. Use of the drug was then assessed 14 years later. 
Individuals with signs of anxiety and depression in 1983 showed an increased risk of starting to use ecstasy. 
The researchers say other factors not tested in their study could account for some people to be more likely to use ecstasy. These included the social environment, novelty seeking and the substance use of parents. 
"Focusing on these vulnerable individuals in future studies will increase our insight into the potential harmful effects of MDMA," they conclude. 
For more information about ecstasy and other drugs, side-effects, and where to go for support or referral, see the DrugInfo Clearinghouse website, run by the Australian Drug Foundation.

Could the explosion be a new type of gamma-ray burst?
A new kind of cosmic explosion has been spotted in Earth's celestial neighbourhood, scientists report. 
The blast seems like a gamma-ray burst, one of the most distant and powerful type of explosion known to astronomers. 
But when scientists first detected it with NASA's Swift satellite on 18 February, the explosion was about 25 times closer and lasted 100 times longer than a typical gamma-ray burst. 
"This is totally new, totally unexpected," says Dr Neil Gehrels, Swift's principal investigator.
"This is the type of unscripted event in our nearby universe that we hoped Swift could catch." 
The explosion originated in a star-forming galaxy about 440 million light-years away towards the constellation Aries.
A light-year is about 10 trillion kilometres, the distance light travels in a year. 
This would be the second-closest gamma-ray burst ever detected, if indeed it is one. 
The burst lasted for nearly 2000 seconds, or about 33 minutes, astronomers say. Most bursts last a few milliseconds to tens of seconds.
The burst was also surprisingly dim. 
Scientists at Italy's National Institute for Astrophysics found hints of a budding supernova, an exploding star, when they saw the afterglow from the original explosion grow brighter in optical light. 
If it is a supernova, scientists will have an unprecedented view of one from start to finish. 
Scientists will attempt observations with the Hubble Space Telescope and Chandra X-ray Observatory.

Nicotine, suspected to come from cigarette butts, are among many chemicals vacuumed up in dust from Sydney's roads
Chemicals from car exhausts, asphalt and cigarette butts are covering our roads, an Australian study suggests.
And accumulated run-off may need to be treated as toxic waste, says researcher Associate Professor James Ball of the University of Technology, Sydney.
As well as raising environmental concerns, this finding may mean authorities will face increased clean-up costs, Ball says.
The researchers went out onto Sydney roads with a modified vacuum cleaner to suck up samples, the first study to look at polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and nicotine in road dust.
They found dirt blown in from many kilometres. And when the researchers analysed particles smaller than 200 micrometres in size, they identified 20 chemicals, including nicotine, plasticisers and PAHs.
"Nobody's gone looking for these before," says Ball, who has been studying pollution on road surfaces for the past 15 years.
Roads make up about one-fifth of the urban land area, he says, and about half the impervious surfaces.
He says any pollutants that fall on roads can easily wash off into the stormwater system with the slightest rain. 
Even small storms yielding 10 millimetres of rainfall can mobilise the dust, says Ball. The dust then enters the waterways, silting up creeks, ponds and wetlands.
In the dust
Nicotine, most likely from tossed away cigarette butts, is an alkaloid with a half-life in the environment of 30 days and can be toxic to aquatic organisms.
PAHs come from a range of sources including vehicle exhausts, asphalt roads and fires.
PAHs can accummulate in living tissue and some are carcinogens, says Professor Des Connell of Griffith University in Brisbane.
"[PAHs] will be taken up by fish and accumulate in fish," he says.
Ball also found many other previously reported pollutants in the dust, like phosphorous that leads to algal blooms.
And he found trace amounts of heavy metals such as lead and zinc from tyres, petrol and bearings; chromium from wear and tear on car bodies, and copper from brake linings.
"All of these are potentially hazardous," he says.
Cleaning up
Ball says the discovery of new pollutants on roads like PAHs has implications for authorities, which already have their hands full treating stormwater pollution.
"It expands the number of contaminants that we have to manage," he says.
And, he says, authorities may have to pay more attention to run-off from roads.
Currently, says Ball, authorities are focused on the immediate risk to humans from sewage contaminating stormwater systems, and the immediate risk to waterways from nutrients.
But, he says, the discovery of environmentally persistent chemicals in road run-off may mean areas receiving the run-off may eventually have to be treated like toxic waste.
Ball says he received funding from the New South Wales Environment Protection Authority (now the Department of Environment and Conservation ) and the Roads and Traffic Authority for his study, which is yet to be published.

This beaver-like mammal, Castorocauda lutrasimilis, would have taken a dip about 164 million years ago
Mammals took to water 100 million years earlier than anyone thought, say scientists after the discovery of a curious beaver-like fossil in China.
The animal lived 164 million years ago alongside dinosaurs, report US and Chinese researchers in the latest issue of the journal Science.
It had a flat paddle-like tail and webbed feet, resembling a beaver. And it had fur and even the inner ear structure of a mammal, the scientists say.
But it might have not gnawed trees as modern beavers do; its teeth suggest it ate fish.
Professor Thomas Martin of the Forschungsinstitut Senckenberg in Frankfurt, Germany, says the finding shows the diversity of early mammals.
"This exciting fossil is a further jigsaw-puzzle piece in a series of recent discoveries, demonstrating that the diversity and early evolutionary history of mammals were much more complex than perceived less than a decade ago," he writes in a commentary. 
The fossil was found in the Middle Jurassic Jiulongshan Formation in China, a deposit rich in the fossils of dinosaurs, early insects and other creatures that dates to 164 million years ago. 
Dr Qiang Ji and colleagues at Nanjing University in China and the Carnegie Museum of Natural History in Pittsburgh say the animal, which they named Castorocauda lutrasimilis, would have weighed just 500 grams. 
"It is the most primitive taxon in the mammalian lineage known to have fur and has a broad, flattened, partly scaly tail analogous to that of modern beavers," they write. 
They found remnants of fur, scales on the tail and, in between the back toes, webbing.

An acidic burp can give you heartburn symptoms
Reflux doesn't have to be extremely acidic to give you that burning feeling, a new study shows.
In fact, burping can result in heartburn even when no liquid accompanies the gas up the oesophagus, Dutch researchers report. 
Dr AJ Bredenoord and colleagues from St Antonius Hospital in Nieuwegein, the Netherlands, report their findings in the latest issue of the journal Gut. 
The researchers monitored 32 patients with gastroesophageal reflux disease, or GERD, who had stopped taking their acid-suppressing medication.
They were monitored for 24 hours using traditional pH testing as well as a technique called impedance. 
Impedance allows researchers to evaluate how far reflux extends up from the stomach, measure the volume of reflux, and evaluate acidity with greater precision.
"It's a completely new way of looking at reflux," Bredenoord says. 
The acid test
There were 1807 episodes of reflux, 203 of them causing symptoms. 
Episodes that caused symptoms showed a larger increase in acidity within the oesophagus, more acidity, and extended further up the oesophagus. 
The volume of reflux in heartburn-causing episodes was larger than for those that caused no symptoms, while the liquid also took longer to clear from the oesophagus. 
Nearly 15% of reflux episodes were caused by more weakly acidic reflux material. 
Just gas
The researchers also identified 426 gas-only reflux episodes, 12 of which caused symptoms.
Symptoms were more likely with gas reflux if they were accompanied by a rise in acidity. 
"[The findings show that] if you only focus on looking at whether these symptoms are related to acid, you will certainly miss a few patients who symptoms are also related to weakly acid reflux," Bredenoord says.
And volume of reflux, as well as its acidity, plays a role in whether it causes symptoms, he adds.
New drugs
He points out that some drug companies are developing medications designed to reduce the number of reflux episodes, rather than targeting acidity, as all currently available GERD drugs do.
This could be helpful for the minority of patients whose symptoms are due to more weakly acid reflux, he says. 
For more information on heartburn and reflux, see the consumer information section of the Gastroenterological Society of Australia website.

A watchdog would monitor research to make sure it wasn't used by bioterrorists, yet would allow legitimate research to continue. But not everyone agrees this balance is possible
A global watchdog is needed to prevent science being misused to produce biological weapons, say Canadian academics.
"Bioterrorists require darkness to succeed," says Professor Peter Singer, director of the Joint Centre for Bioethics at the University of Toronto, which has published a report calling for global network of experts to help spot any misuses of science for biological warfare. 
"In effect, we're calling for an IAEA of biotechnology," he adds, referring to the International Atomic Energy Authority, the global nuclear watchdog. 
"Not with a team of IAEA-type inspectors, though, but an expanding global network of scientists." 
The rationale behind the report, entitled DNA for peace: reconciling biodevelopment and biosecurity, is fear that there will be a crackdown on genuine scientific research in the name of biosecurity, an attempt to prevent biological warfare or deliberately created epidemics.
"The question is how do you create a system where people are talking in such a way that you can enhance the positive use of biotechnology and protect against the misuse of them in such areas as bioterrorism," says Elizabeth Dowdeswell, co-author of the report and the former head of the UN Environment Program. 
The scientists want the Group of Eight industrialised nations to help create the new watchdog, and they want investment in "positive applications" of biological sciences in developing countries. 
That would include efforts to cure or prevent disease, and to alleviate poverty, they say. 
But Dr Eike-Henner Kluge, an expert on bioethics and a professor at the University of Victoria in British Columbia, says a surveillance network is "pragmatically unrealistic".
He questioned who would monitor and pay for the proposed body. 
"How do you balance a possible negative threat on the one hand with a possible good on the other?" says Kluge. "This is the two-edged sword that accompanies any research."

Marmoset fathers gain weight while their partners are pregnant to prepare for their role as a new dad
Fathers of at least two primate species gradually gain weight during their mate's pregnancy, a new study has found.
Researchers observed this classic female pregnancy symptom in common marmoset (Callithrix jacchus) and cotton-top tamarin (Saguinus oedipus) male primates.
They published their results in a recent issue of the journal Biology Letters.
The scientists suspect that males in most monogamous primates, including gibbons, some lemurs species and humans, also show signs of pregnancy when their mates are expecting.
While the new study represents the first evidence for gradual weight gain in non-human primate expectant fathers, earlier research found that 11-65% of all human fathers have experienced some symptoms of pregnancy.
The symptoms include weight gain, nausea, headaches, irritability, restlessness, backaches, colds, nervousness and hormonal changes, such as higher levels of the stress-fighting hormone cortisol and the strength-boosting hormone testosterone.
Previously it was thought that these were just psychosomatic symptoms. But for many such dads it is likely that the changes help them to cope with the rigours of fatherhood once the baby is born.
This is particularly important for the doting, yet squirrel-sized, marmoset and tamarin dads, whose job includes toting around their often hefty babies.
"Males do most of the carrying of infants - usually two - once they are born," says Dr Toni Ziegler, lead author of the study.
"The males invest highly in infant care, even losing weight while carrying these heavy, multiple infants through the trees," says Ziegler, a senior scientist at the University of Wisconsin, Madison.
Ziegler and her team obtained monthly weight measurements for 29 male marmosets and 29 male cotton-top tamarins. Of these monkeys, nine marmosets and 11 tamarins had pregnant mates.
The researchers determined that the expectant fathers experienced roughly a 10% increase in weight gain during their mate's pregnancy.
The extra weight, which was not associated with copied eating habits, occurred gradually over the gestation periods, which are five months for marmosets and about six months for tamarins.
The extra padding is not the only pregnancy symptom that scientists have identified in the monkey dads. The males apparently are so in tune with their mates that they undergo other physiological changes.
"We have found for cotton-top tamarins, that males show hormonal changes around mid-pregnancy and these changes may help prepare them for their role in infant care," Ziegler says.
"They also detect when their mate is going to ovulate and have an increase in testosterone a few days before she ovulates, so I think they are getting signals for the female at important reproductive events."
Hardly surprising
Brian Craft, lead keeper at Oakland Zoo in California, is not surprised by the findings.
Craft says most monogamous non-human primate dads have the following daily schedule: "feed, travel, rest and then more of the same, with just a little time in between for play."
"The weight gain could serve as a decoy for predation, but it more likely fortifies males, who have less time for foraging once the offspring are born. The changes, therefore, may benefit the entire family," he adds.

The length of a particular gene controls your risk of developing depression after divorce, unemployment or illness
More than a fifth of the population has a genetic predisposition to major depression triggered by a string of stressful life events, Australian researchers announce. 
These events include: the loss of a parent or other significant relative; a relationship breakdown; or employment, financial, housing and health crises. 
The study, published in the latest issue of the British Journal of Psychiatry, found a gene that controls the neurotransmitter serotonin is crucial.
The researchers found that people with a 'short' version of the serotonin transporter gene have an 80% chance of developing clinical depression if they have three or more negative life events in a year.
People with a 'long', or more protective, version of the gene only have a 30% risk of becoming depressed under similar circumstances.
The study, by researchers from the University of New South Wales with affiliated research institutes and teaching hospitals, evaluated the relationship between genes and life experience from young adulthood into middle age in 127 teachers across 25 years.
It is the first study to account for the timing of the first onset of depression across the lifespan.
The long and the short of it
'Short' and 'long' versions of the serotonin transporter gene 5-HTTLPR, located on chromosome 17, are created by a slight variation in the sequence of DNA.
One version of the gene is inherited from each parent in certain combinations. According to the research, those who inherit two short versions are the most susceptible to depression.
The study showed 21% of us have two short versions of the gene, 26% two long versions and the rest have one long and one short variant. 
Professor Philip Mitchell, head of the university's School of Psychiatry and convenor of Brain Sciences UNSW, emphasises that this is a susceptibility or risk gene not a disease gene.
"Having two short versions of the gene doesn't make you depressed per se; it increases the likelihood of becoming depressed if you experience stressful life events," he says.
Identifying who's at risk
Mitchell says the findings could help identify people at increased risk of depression and help direct resources into preventative interventions for people with the susceptible genetic make up.
"I think this will spark off important clinical debate about when tests like this should become clinically available," he says.
"The ethical question is not only whether this test should be made available publicly, but also who should have access to the results. We err on the side of privacy but private insurance bodies, for example, could demand the information as part of their risk assessment."
For information about depression, including support and referral options, see Australia's national depression initiative beyondblue, or depressioNet.

When Mount Tambora erupted in 1815, it killed 10,000 people instantly and buried the nearby village in volcanic debris
Scientists are unearthing the 'Pompeii of the East', an Indonesian village buried nearly two centuries ago by the largest volcanic eruption in recorded history.
Two years ago, a team of scientists including those from the University of Rhode Island and the Indonesian  Directorate of Volcanology and Geological Hazard Mitigation, began digging up the village of Tambora, which was buried by a volcanic eruption in 1815. 
The excavation shows how Tambora's 10,000 residents were killed in moments by an avalanche of hot volcanic ash, rock and volcanic gas known as a pyroclastic flow. 
The village was buried in 3 metres of volcanic debris. And in all, 117,000 people were killed.
The eruption was the largest in recorded history, says Haraldur Sigurdsson, a University of Rhode Island professor who has studied Tambora since 1986.
"Events of this type will occur in the future, and we should be aware of what could happen," he says. 
The eruption of Mount Tambora on Sumbawa island blew 200 times more magma and pulverised rock into the air than Mount St Helen's in the US state of Washington in 1980, according to Sigurdsson. 
Tambora's blast also sent sulfur dioxide 43 kilometres into the air, creating a chemical chain reaction in the atmosphere that caused a year of global cooling that made 1816 "the year without a summer". 
Scientists located Tambora with help from a local guide, who told them that pottery fragments and human bones had been found in a gully. In the mid-2004 dig, scientists discovered an entombed house with two people inside. 
One woman was found in the kitchen, her hand next to glass bottles that had been melted by the ash flow.
The house, on wooden stilts with bamboo siding and a thatched roof, had been incinerated into charcoal by the fiery ash that Sigurdsson believes was at least 538&deg;C. 
The finding is significant, Sigurdsson says, because "it means that we know that in an eruption such as that in 1815, that pyroclastic flows extend from the volcano in all directions to a distance of at least 40 kilometres radially and within that zone there is an extinction of all life." 
Scientists also studied the deposits of volcanic ash and documented the size of the particles and their distance from the volcano, says Steven Carey, a University of Rhode Island professor with a background in physical volcanology. 
The data can be plugged into computer models that will simulate volcano blasts and their potential fallout, he adds. 
The deposits are one factor used to determine Tambora's eruption rate, or how much content was spewed out of the volcano and how quickly. That, says Sigurdsson, will determine when relatively harmless fallout turns into deadly ash flow.

The Pinwheel galaxy contains one trillion stars
The largest and most detailed image of a spiral galaxy has been released, including surprising views of its star-forming regions.
The image is of the gigantic Pinwheel galaxy, or Messier 101, and was compiled from 51 images from the Hubble Space Telescope, with extra data from ground-based telescopes.
The image reveals a giant spiral disc of stars, dust and gas, some 170,000 light-years across, about twice the diameter of the Milky Way.
A high-resolution version of the image, which shows individual stars, is available on the Space Telescope Science Institute website.
The galaxy contains about one trillion stars, about 100 billion thought to be about the same age and temperature as our Sun.
Its spiral arms have large star-forming nubulae, star nurseries in hydrogen clouds. And bright young clusters of newborn blue stars trace out the spiral arms.
The disc of the galaxy is so thin, the researchers say, that Hubble easily sees many more distant galaxies through it.
The Pinwheel galaxy lies in the northern constellation the Great Bear and is about 25 million light-years from Earth.
The light we see from the galaxy today is as it was at the beginning of the Miocene period on Earth, when mammals flourished and the mastodon first appeared, the researchers say.
The composite image was compiled from images originally taken to study the expansion rate of the universe, star cluster formation, x-ray emissions and blue supergiant stars.

Inflammation after infection with the Epstein-Barr virus might trigger temporary brain damage
Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) might be caused by a temporary 'brain injury' during the early, inflammatory stages of glandular fever, according to Australian scientists.
"We believe that parts of the brain which control perception of fatigue and pain are damaged during the acute infection phase of glandular fever," says lead researcher, Professor Andrew Lloyd from the University of New South Wales.
The researchers, who publish their study this week in the Journal of Infectious Diseases, believe the Epstein-Barr virus, which causes glandular fever, might trigger CFS in some people. 
While most people with glandular fever recover in several weeks, disabling symptoms including prolonged fatigue can last for at least six months, known as CFS.
The scientists found the virus itself does not cause this ongoing fatigue but they hypothesise that a 'hit and run' brain injury does. 
"If you're still sick several weeks after infection, it seems the symptoms aren't being driven by the activity of the virus in the body, it's happening in the brain," Lloyd says.
The study is the first to follow patients within a few weeks of acute glandular fever infection for a year.
It tracked 39 people including eight who were sick for at least six months, and 31 who recovered quickly.
Levels of virus in the blood were no different in patients who recovered quickly from those whose fatigue lasted more than six months.
"It's not the virus or an ongoing inflammatory response directed at the virus causing ongoing symptoms. But an inflammatory process in the acute illness might disturb brain function and make it stay symptomatic," Lloyd says.
The mystery of CFS
Lloyd says CFS affects one in 100 Australians and millions worldwide.
It is a group of symptoms for which there is no medical or psychiatric explanation including unrefreshing sleep, muscle and joint pain, concentration and memory difficulties and prolonged fatigue.
People with CFS are often unable to work or attend school.
Theories about causes range from muscle and immune system to psychiatric problems, hormonal changes and the growing body of data linking infectious diseases, including glandular fever, as a trigger.
The scientists will test their hypothesis by doing brain scans on study participants.
For more information on CFS, see the ME/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome Association of Australia's website.

Australia's new chief scientist is a long-term advocate of GM crops
The position has been vacant for nine months. But Australia now has a new chief scientist whose appointment has been met with a spectrum of responses from unqualified support to downright disappointment.
Dr Jim Peacock, the 68-year old former chief of CSIRO Plant Industry and head of the Australian Academy of Science, was yesterday appointed as the Prime Minister's new part-time adviser on science and technology.
Peacock is still finalising his contract under which he will continue his role as a senior researcher at CSIRO.
He takes up the reins from the previous chief scientist, Dr Robin Batterham, who resigned amidst claims that his advice to government was influenced by the interests of resource and energy giant Rio Tinto, a company he worked for part time.
Peacock says he does not anticipate his dual role will result in any conflicts of interest, but some commentators say his impartiality may be questioned nevertheless.
GM advocate?
One issue is his ongoing support for genetic modification (GM) technology.
"It think the integration of these [GM] technologies into our agribusiness will be essential for the future," Peacock told ABC Radio today.
He acknowledges there are many concerns in the community about GM food and crops but hopes this will change as people understand the benefits of the technology.
Professor Ian Lowe, head of the Australian Conservation Foundation and emeritus professor at Griffith University, says it is appropriate that a distinguished scientist has taken up the role of chief scientist but foresees problems.
"He's been a long-standing advocate of genetic technology so he's not going to be seen as neutral in the discussions about that issue," says Lowe.
While Labor welcomes the appointment the Greens say they are "extremely disappointed" and see Peacock's advocacy of GM as "highly divisive".

In their lifetime, Western women will have four times as many periods as women from some traditional societies
Regularly skipping menstrual periods using methods including the contraceptive pill might help reduce the risk of some gynaecological cancers, a conference will hear next week.
Professor Ian Fraser, a professor of reproductive medicine at Australia's University of Sydney, says the fewer periods a woman has, the better.
The modern consequences of too much menstruation include breast, ovarian and endometrial cancers, endometriosis, uterine fibroids, polycystic ovary syndrome and severe cyclical menstrual symptoms, he will tell the Human Reproductive Health Through the Ages conference in Adelaide.
"The belief is regular menses means 'a good clean out' but having lots of periods is not a healthy process," Fraser says.
"In our society women have many more periods than in primitive societies and each menstrual cycle leads to big swings in the ovarian hormones oestrogen and progesterone."
Fraser says this overstimulates reproductive organs and the breasts.
"The uterus, lining of the uterus and breasts were not designed to cope with this and it causes some cells to grow and regress each month, which means a greater chance of error in the proliferation process of abnormal cells," he says.
"Breast cancer in our society is 100-fold greater than in primitive societies and having lots of menstrual cycles probably plays a role in that."
He says substantial increases in the risk of endometrial cancer occurs as the uterus lining grows and regresses each month and in ovarian cancer as ovaries grow and regress during egg release.
"My view is we probably have sufficient, strong, supportive anecdotal and suggestive evidence, although no solid long-term evidence, that for many women taking the pill or an intra-uterine device for extra years than they might have done for contraception may help later protect against a number of conditions."
Fraser says present day Kalahari bushwomen have about 100 periods in a lifetime compared with Western women's 450.
In our society, girls menstruate earlier and women have more periods before giving birth than women like the Kalahari.
Women from traditional societies breastfeed for extended times, often conceive soon after menses return, average five to six pregnancies and have an earlier menopause, all factors that reduce the number of periods they have in a lifetime.

Brain implants may turn sharks into underwater spies, says the US military
The Pentagon is funding research into neural implants with the ultimate hope of turning sharks into 'stealth spies' capable of gliding undetected through the ocean, a report says.
The research, outlined in this week's issue of New Scientist builds on experimental work to control animals by implanting tiny electrodes in their brain, which are then stimulated to induce a behavioural response. 
"The Pentagon hopes to exploit sharks' natural ability to glide quietly through the water, sense delicate electrical gradients and follow chemical trails," says the report.
"By remotely guiding the sharks' movements they hope to transform the animals into stealth spies, perhaps capable of following vessels without being spotted." 
The project is being funded by the Pentagon Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA).
Scientists involved in the scheme presented their work last week at a meeting on Ocean Sciences in Honolulu, Hawaii, the report says.
A team at Boston University has implanted electrodes into the brain of a spiny dogfish in a shallow tank. 
The implants, controlled by a small radio transmitter, stimulate either the right or left side of a brain area dedicated to smell, causing the fish to flick around in that direction in response to the signal. 
The next step will be to take this device outside the laboratory. Blue sharks implanted with the gadget are to be released off the coast of Florida. 
As radio signals will not penetrate the sea, communications with the fish will be made through US Navy acoustic towers capable of sending sonar signals to a shark up to 300 kilometres away. 
Other DARPA-funded researchers are working on using implants to record brain activity in sharks to understand which neurons are fired by scents, electrical or magnetic fields. 
These signals help the fish to navigate and offer the reward of food, and could thus in theory be manipulated for surveillance work. 
New Scientist says the DARPA work is controversial, but also points out that work with animal implants also has a potential benefit for medicine. 
Understanding more about the brain's electrical signals could one day result in implants to control a prosthetic limb to overcome paralysis, the report says.

Experts disagree about which of Shakespeare's portraits are real or fake and what we can tell about his health by studying them
William Shakespeare died in pain of a rare form of cancer that deformed his left eye, according to a German academic who says she has discovered the disease in four genuine portraits of the world's most famous playwright.
As London's National Portrait Gallery prepares to reveal in a show that only one out of six portraits of the Bard may be his exact likeness, Professor Hildegard Hammerschmidt-Hummel, from the University of Mainz, provides forensic evidence of at least four contemporary portraits of Shakespeare.
Hammerschmidt-Hummel, who will publish in April the results of her 10-year research in the book The True Face of William Shakespeare, used forensic imaging technologies to examine nine images believed to portray the playwright.
These technologies included the trick image differentiation technique, photogrammetry, computer montages and laser scanning.
Four of these portraits shared 17 identical features.
"The Chandos and Flower portrait, the Davenant bust and the Darmstadt death mask, all showed one and the same man: William Shakespeare. They depict his features in such precise detail and so true to life that they could only have been produced by an artist for whom the poet sat personally," says Hammerschmidt-Hummel.
The portraits show a growth on the upper left eyelid and a protuberance in the nasal corner, which seems to represent three different stages of a disease.
"At Shakespeare's time, the artists depicted their sitters realistically and accurately, absolutely true to life, including all visible signs of disease," Hammerschmidt-Hummel says.
A team of doctors analysed the paintings and concluded that Shakespeare, who died aged 52 in 1616, most likely suffered from a rare form of cancer.
According to ophthalmologist Dr Walter Lerche, the playwright suffered from a cancer of the tear duct known as Mikulicz's syndrome.
A protuberance in the nasal corner of the left eye was interpreted as a small caruncular tumour.
Dermatologist Dr Jost Metz diagnosed "a chronic, annular skin sarcoidosis", while the yellowish spots on the lower lip of the Flower portrait were interpreted as an inflammation of the oral mucous membrane indicating a debilitating systemic illness.
"Shakespeare must have been in quite considerable pain. The deformation of the left eye was no doubt particularly distressing. It can also be assumed that the trilobate protuberance in the nasal corner of the left eye, causing a marked deviation of the eyelid margin, was experienced as a large and painful obstruction," Hammerschmidt-Hummel says.
Her findings have stirred a controversy in England.
The National Portrait Gallery, which conducted a four-year study of possible surviving portraits for the exhibition Searching for Shakespeare, stresses that "today we have no certain lifetime portrait of England's most famous poet and playwright".
Hammerschmidt-Hummel's conclusion is based on a "fundamental misunderstanding" since "portraits are not, and can never be forensic evidence of likeness", the gallery says.
Most experts, including those at the National Portrait Gallery, agree that only the Chandos painting may be a likely Shakespeare portrait.
The terracotta Davenant bust, which has been standing for 150 years in the London gentleman's Garrick Club, has long believed to be work of the 18th century French sculptor Roubiliac.
Hammerschmidt-Hummel traced it back to the times of Shakespeare through the diary of William Clift, curator of the Royal College of Surgeons' Hunterian Museum in London.
She learned that Clift found the bust in 1834 near a theatre that was previously owned by Sir William Davenant, Shakespeare's godson. Davenant owned many Shakespeare mementos, including the Chandos painting.
It's a fake
The most controversial seems to be the Flower portrait, which the National Portrait Gallery dismissed as a fake as it featured a pigment not in use until around 1818.
Hammerschmidt-Hummel contends that the painting is nothing more than a copy of the portrait she examined 10 years ago. The original Flowers had evidence of swelling around the eye and forehead, while the one about to go on display at the gallery does not have these features, she says.
The Darmstadt death mask, so-called because it resides in Darmstadt Castle in Germany, has been long dismissed as a 19th century fake.
But according to Hammerschmidt-Hummel, the features, and most of all the impression of a swelling above the left-eye, make it certain that it was taken shortly after Shakespeare's death.
"A 3D technique of photogrammetry made visible craters of the swelling. This was really stunning evidence," Hammerschmidt-Hummel says.

Bounty Bay on Pitcairn Island shows the island's typical steep rocky shoreline
The original Polynesian community on the Pitcairn Islands died out because it lost touch with its neighbours who provided crucial resources, an Australian archaeologist says.
Dr Marshall Weisler of the University of Queensland will discuss his research on the reliance of Pitcairn islanders on the neighbouring Mangareva or Gambier islanders at a conference in Mexico later this year.
"[Pitcairn is] the kind of island that can only have people on it in the long run if it's being resourced from outside periodically," says Weisler, who has been studying Pitcairn since 1990.
"It wasn't sustainable in the long run because the trading connections between the Pitcairn group and Mangareva stopped."
The UK-governed Pitcairn Islands, are a group of four small rugged and relatively barren islands in a remote part of the western Pacific.
Today, they are home to a handful of descendants of Fletcher Christian who led the mutiny on the Bounty in 1789.
The two main islands in the group are Pitcairn and Henderson, which were originally settled in around 800 to 900 AD, he says, by "a couple of dozen" Polynesians from the neighbouring island of Mangareva.
But by the time the Spanish explorer Ferdinand Queros sailed by in 1606, the islands had been abandoned.
Surviving on Pitcairn
Weisler spent several months at Pitcairn to work out why.
He says archaeological evidence collected suggests early Pitcairn inhabitants ate seafood and seabirds such as the booby, and used earth ovens to cook.
He says they put a fair bit of pressure on the islands' resources. For example, some species of land birds went extinct during the occupation.

The near-Earth object known as 2004 VD17 may give Earth its closest shave, but not until 2102 when the risk of hitting the planet is one in 1000
A space rock capable of sub-continent scale devastation has about a one in 1000 risk of colliding with Earth early next century, the highest of any known asteroid, watchers say.
The rock, 2004 VD17, is about 500 metres long and has a mass of nearly a billion tonnes.
If it were to hit Earth, it would deliver 10,000 megatonnes of energy, equivalent to all the world's nuclear weapons. 
VD17 was spotted in late November 2004 and was swiftly identified as a rock that potentially crosses Earth's orbit. At the time watchers gave it one in 3000 risk of collision on 4 May 2102. 
Further observations and calculations have prompted the risk on that day to be upgraded to "a bit less than 1 in 1000", says NASA near-Earth object (NEO) expert Dr David Morrison.
"The risk of an impact within the next century [is] higher than that of any other known asteroid," he says, stressing however that the likelihood of a hit is small. 
"Fortunately, it is nearly a century before the close pass from VD17. This should provide ample time to refine the orbit and, most probably, determine that the asteroid will miss the Earth." 
VD17 was previously categorised as a grade green, which means merits careful watching, on the Torino scale of NEO hazards. But it has been upgraded to grade yellow, meaning meriting attention. 
There are two more grades beyond this, orange or close encounter, and red or collision is certain, involving objects capable of inflicting regional or global devastation. 
The asteroid's closest proximity to Earth on the 2102 flyby was not given by Morrison or the hazard list maintained by NASA and the US Jet Propulsion Laboratory. 
Biggest threat?
VD17's place at the top of the list was briefly snatched in December 2004 by a rock called 99942 Apophis. 
Further observations, however, downgraded Apophis' risk to a one in 5000 chance of collision, making it a grade green risk. 
Apophis, measuring 300 metres across and with a mass of less than 100 million tonnes, will fly by at a distance of 36,350 kilometres from the Earth's surface on 13 April 2029.
This is slightly higher than the altitude of geosynchronous satellites, according to the website of the International Astronomical Union's Minor Planet Center.

A floating iceberg off the Antarctic Peninsula
Antarctica's mammoth ice sheet is in "significant decline", scientists say, probably due to climate change. 
US researchers at the University of Colorado  at Boulder say online in the journal Science today the Antarctic ice sheet is losing up to 152 cubic kilometres of ice a year.
"This is the first study to indicate the total mass balance of the Antarctic ice sheet is in significant decline," says Dr Isabella Velicogna, of the university's Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences. 
The team calculated that the ice sheet lost 152 cubic kilometres a year from April 2002 to August 2005, give or take 80 cubic kilometres.
This is equivalent to global seas rising 0.4 millimetres a year, with a margin of error of 0.2 millimetres, the researchers say.
The bulk of the loss is occurring in the West Antarctic ice sheet, according to Velicogna, whose team used two satellites orbiting Earth in tandem to gather data.
These satellites estimate Earth's global gravity field. And variations in the gravity field over time were used to determine changes in Earth's mass distribution, necessary for estimating changes in mass of the Antarctic ice sheet.
"The changes we are seeing are probably a good indicator of the changing climatic conditions there," Velicogna says. 
The study seems to contradict the 2001 assessment by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change which forecast that the Antarctic ice shelf would actually gain mass in the 21st century due to higher precipitation in a warming climate. 
The US researchers say the IPCC estimate was based on sparse coverage of coastal areas, which would have affected the results.
Twice the size of Australia
As Earth's fifth largest continent, Antarctica is twice the size of Australia and contains 70% percent of Earth's fresh water resources. 
The ice sheet is an average 1981 metres thick. 
Research from the British Antarctic Survey suggests melting of the West Antarctic ice sheet alone would raise global sea levels by more than 6 metres.

Up to 25% of a car's fuel goes on running the air-conditioning
The average family car may one day have fans built into the seats to cool you down as you drive, suggests US government research.
The cooled seats could also cut your fuel bill by more than 7%, say the researchers, fuel that would otherwise be used to run the car's air-conditioning.
"Ventilated seats keep drivers and passengers cooler, so they need less air-conditioning to be comfortable," says the research team, led by John Rugh at the US Department of Energy's National Renewable Energy Laboratory.
The researchers have been trying to reduce fuel consumption for air-conditioning in cars and trucks.
Using a mannequin that breathes and sweats, the researchers tested the effect of a specially constructed seat, containing two fans that pull air from the seat surface and out from underneath the seat.
Their mannequin, called ADAM (ADvanced Automotive Mannequin), together with physiological and psychological models, enabled the researchers to measure how the cool seats increases "thermal comfort" and reduces the need for air-conditioning.
"If all passenger vehicles had ventilated seats, we estimate that there could be a 7.5% reduction in national air-conditioning fuel use," the researchers say.
Real-world savings?
Australian engineer, Associate Professor Eric Hu of Deakin University in Melbourne, welcomes the research.
"Up to 25% of the engine power is used for air-conditioning purposes," says Hu, who works on reducing fuel use associated with vehicle air-conditioning.
While the cool seats might make people feel more comfortable, he doesn't think the researchers' estimate of a 7.5% reduction in fuel consumption will make much difference in the real world.
"Certainly savings are a good thing, but I'm not too sure you can say it's significant," he says.
Hu says it would be easy to achieve the 7.5% savings with good seals, which would prevent the loss of cool air from windows and doors.
And if people don't close their windows tightly, he says the 7.5% savings could easily be blown away.
But Hu says research like this is going in the right direction.
The amount of engine power used by air-conditioning translates to at least 25% of fuel use and 25% of emissions, Hu says. And until recently, he says, this problem has not been taken seriously.
For example, he says air-conditioning is not considered when the fuel economy of new cars is tested in Australia.
Driving uphill
Hu's current research, funded by the Australian Research Council and air-conditioning company Air International, is looking at how air-conditioning affects fuel use under different driving conditions.
For example, he has a theory that when a car full of passengers is driving uphill the engine can become overloaded and burn fuel inefficiently.
This means air-conditioning would use even more fuel and worsen pollution.
Hu is hoping to develop a smart energy management system for cars that could cut off air-conditioning when the car is going uphill and let it kick in when the car is going downhill.
"We want to co-ordinate the engine load and the air-conditioning load," he says. "Currently these two systems are not talking to each other."

The La Niña weather event, which brings higher rainfall to Australia, may be on its way. But the experts don't know how long it will last, or what its effects will be
La Ni&ntilde;a may be on its way, says the UN's weather agency, an event that tends to bring above-average rainfall to Australia and parts of Southeast Asia.
The World Meteorological Organization (WMO) says it has seen unprecedented signs pointing to La Ni&ntilde;a, which originates off the western coast of South America but can disrupt weather patterns around the globe.
The Geneva-based agency says temperatures in the central and eastern equatorial Pacific have been between 0.5 and 1.0&deg;C below normal since the start of 2006.
"Combined with broader tropical Pacific Ocean and atmosphere conditions, this is consistent with the early stages of a basin-wide La Ni&ntilde;a event," it says.
"It is unprecedented in the historical record for a La Ni&ntilde;a of substantial intensity or duration to develop so early in the year." 
La Ni&ntilde;a, which has the opposite effects to the more notorious El Ni&ntilde;o, last occurred from mid-1998 to early 2001. 
Under La Ni&ntilde;a, the sea-surface temperature in the central and eastern tropical Pacific falls below normal.
This typically brings far dryer weather to the southwestern US, Florida and western Latin America and above-average rainfall to Australia, Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines.
But there can also be a knock-on effect much further afield, with an increase to monsoon rainfall in South Asia, unusual coolness in tropical West Africa, Southeast Africa, Japan and the Korean peninsula.
La Ni&ntilde;a usually lasts nine to 12 months, although "some episodes may persist for as long as two years", according to the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
Hang on a minute
But the WMO sounds a note of caution. 
The build-up of this La Ni&ntilde;a is so exceptionally swift and intense that it is impossible at the moment to infer what the impact would be, and how long the phenomenon would last, it warns.
"Most models and expert interpretations favour the event dissipating quite rapidly over the next three to six months," it says.
"Nonetheless, neither a continuation of La Ni&ntilde;a beyond mid-year, nor the development of El Ni&ntilde;o in the second half of 2006, can be ruled out as possible outcomes from the current prevailing situation." 
El Ni&ntilde;o, which last ran from 2002 to 2003, occurs when warm water builds up in the western tropical Pacific and creeps eastwards, again causing huge disruption to classic patterns of rainfall and wind. 
Both El Ni&ntilde;o and La Ni&ntilde;a are naturally occurring cycles, although there is much speculation among climate scientists that human induced global warming may make them more frequent and more vicious and that this trend may have already started. 
El Ni&ntilde;o means 'the little boy' in Spanish. Its name is attributed to fishermen off the coast of South America who noted the appearance of warmer water, often around Christmas. La Ni&ntilde;a means 'the little girl'.

Golf is hard enough to play well on Earth. So how is a Russian cosmonaut going to hit a ball into the right orbit in space?
A Russian cosmonaut plans to whack a golf ball into orbit from the International Space Station, a publicity stunt that critics say would add to the growing problem of space junk.
Pavel Vinogradov is to take on the role of a celestial Tiger Woods under a deal between a Canadian golf club manufacturer and the cash-strapped Russian Space Agency.
In one of three space walks planned from the International Space Station over the next six months, Vinogradov will climb aboard a special platform and swing a special gold-plated six iron and seek to enter the record books for the longest-ever golf drive. 
If all goes well, and NASA, the prime agency in building and running the space station, approves, his ball will orbit the Earth for about four years.
It would travel up to 3.36 billion kilometres before eventually burning up upon friction with the atmosphere. 
"Every single record for distance in the golf industry will be shattered," says Element 21 Golf Co, the Toronto firm behind the scheme. 
The ball will be fitted with a small radio transmitter allowing golf fans to track the ball on their home computer, says the company, which says it will give the club to charity. 
Scientists, though, are less than gleeful. They say, in theory, it should be easy to hit the ball a huge distance.
After all, US astronaut Alan Shepard exulted that his two historic 1971 golf shots on the Moon, where gravity is a sixth of the Earth's, went "miles and miles and miles". 
On the space station, orbiting the Earth at a height of some 350 kilometres, gravity is negligible and friction is zero, which should make it a golfer's dream. 
Taking a shot
But, as experienced golfers will tell you, driving that little white ball with the right force and in the right direction is a lot harder than it seems, even on a terrestrial course. 
The task is that much harder in a thick spacesuit, which leaves little room for a decent swing or flexing the joints. 
The ball thus could quite easily be mis-hit and travel only a couple of metres, or be hooked or sliced and sent in entirely the wrong direction.
As a result, it could accidentally land in the same orbital plane as the space station. Station and ball would both whizz around the planet on the same track, one after the other. 
And what that means is a remote risk of a collision, capable of damaging or even destroying the space station, depending on the angle, velocity and site of impact.
"There's a lot of room in space, but orbital mechanics is a wonderful thing, and things tend to come back to where you launched them from," says Dr Heiner Klinkrad, acting head of space debris at the European Space Agency. 
"For the [space station], the most probable collision velocity in the worst-case scenario is somewhere at 10 to 11 kilometres per second," he says. 
"This thing is certainly larger than a centimetre, which means it would certainly penetrate the shields of the space station if it hits at this speed." 
The perfect swing
Dr Jean-Michel Contant, secretary general of the International Academy of Astronautics, a Paris-based forum on space research, suggests that Vinogradov's boots be strapped to the platform and that he make a few practice swings on a tethered ball before doing the big drive. 
"If safety criteria are respected, this exercise could be useful as a teaching tool for children and students and be fun for the broad public," he says. 
"But it holds out no scientific benefits and if the worst-case scenario happens, it won't be fun at all." 
Another problem is that of space junk, especially from exploded satellites and boosters, which is becoming a threat to satellites and travellers. 
"The international recommendations are that you should not throw out unnecessary objects, and I wouldn't qualify a golf ball as a mission-related object," Klinkrad says. 
Junk in space
The junk region of most concern is between 900 and 1000 kilometres above Earth, where there are many navigation, communication and  weather satellites. The golf ball would be far below this height. 
Dr Bill Ailor, a director of the Center for Orbital and Reentry Debris Studies at The Aerospace Corporation in El Segundo, California, told New Scientist magazine there are about 300 operational satellites in this low-orbit zone. 
These could in theory be at risk from the ball as it slowly spirals towards Earth.
"But the chance of something like that happening is probably very low," says Ailor.
A NASA spokesperson says its engineers are vetting the planned golf drive for safety but was unable to say when this review would be completed.

New Zealand fruits, like fruits of the swamp maire shown here, are rich in antioxidants, scientists are finding. This may help to explain low levels of infectious disease in pre-European Maori people
Plants traditionally eaten by Maori people are the world's richest source of antioxidants, New Zealand scientists show.
"Until now blueberries have been regarded as the 'king of the antioxidants', the best source of antioxidants in a Western diet and the standard by which they're measured," says Associate Professor Kevin Gould of the University of Otago.
"But almost half the plants we tested had concentrations many times higher," says Gould, who measured levels in both native and introduced plants.
Puha, a plant similar to watercress and still commonly eaten by Maori people, has over three times the concentration of antioxidants of blueberries, and New Zealand honeysuckle 10 times.
But the fruit of the Syzygium maire or swamp maire tops the lot, with 18 times the concentration.
The study, published in the New Zealand Journal of Botany, opens up several exciting avenues for further research, Gould says.
"It may account for the low incidence of non-infectious disease in pre-European Maori. Even now Maori are less at risk from colon and rectal cancers than New Zealanders of European descent," he says.
"But it may also reflect the way New Zealand plants are responding to global warming and other environmental stresses."
Plants are particularly susceptible to stress from too much ultraviolet (UV) radiation; because of the hole in the ozone layer above Antarctica, New Zealand has one of the highest levels of UV radiation in the world.  
Under stress
All organisms produce free radicals when they are stressed. Normally the organism can deal with them by producing its own antioxidants to mop up them up. But too many antioxidants can cause damage.
"A free radical is an unstable molecule that behaves irrationally," says Gould.
"It's a bit like a jilted lover, bent on revenge, wanting to attack the first thing it sees. It's unstable because it's lacking an electron, or it's got too many, so it just wants to grab one from anywhere, including the tissue from your lung or your bowels."
Finding plants with such high concentrations of antioxidants may prove doubly beneficial, the researchers say.
They are potentially rich sources of dietary antioxidants and could provide a better understanding of how plants respond to environmental stress.

The Sun's next active period could by twice as energetic as the last one
Sun-spawned cosmic storms that can play havoc with earthly power grids and orbiting satellites could be 50% stronger in the next 11-year solar cycle than in the last one, scientists say.
Using a new model that takes into account what happens under the Sun's surface and data about previous solar cycles, astronomers say the next cycle could start as soon as this year or as late as 2008.
They offer no specific predictions of solar storms, but they hope to formulate early warnings that will give power companies, satellite operators and others on and around Earth a few days to prepare. 
"This prediction of an active solar cycle suggests we're potentially looking at more communications disruptions, more satellite failures, possible disruptions of electrical grids and blackouts, more dangerous conditions for astronauts," says Dr Richard Behnke of the Upper Atmosphere Research Section at the National Science Foundation. 
"Predicting and understanding space weather will soon be even more vital than ever before," Behnke says. 
The prediction, roughly analogous to the early prediction of a severe hurricane season on Earth, involves the number of sunspots on the solar surface, phenomena that have been monitored for more than a century. 
Twisted magnetic fields
Every 11 years or so, the Sun goes through an active period, with lots of sunspots. This is important as solar storms, linked to twisted magnetic fields that can hurl out energetic particles, tend to occur near sunspots. 
The Sun is in a relatively quiet period now, but is expected to get more active soon, scientists say.
But scientists do not agree whether the active period will start within months, late 2006 or early 2007, or years, with the first signs in late 2007 or early 2008.
Whenever it begins, the new forecasting method shows sunspot activity is likely to be 30-50% stronger than the last active period.
The peak of the last cycle was in 2001, the researchers say, but the period of activity can span much of a decade.
The strongest solar cycle in recent memory occurred in the late 1950s, when there were few satellites aloft, no astronauts in orbit and less reliance on electrical power grids than now. 
What would happen on Earth?
If a similarly active period occurred now, the impact would be hard to predict, according to Joseph Kunches of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Space Environment Center in Colorado. 
"It's pretty uncertain what would happen, which makes this work more relevant," Kunches says. 
"What we have here is a prediction that the cycle is going to be very active, and what we need and what we're of course working on is to be able to predict individual storms with a couple days or hours in advance so the grids can take the action," Behnke says.

Feeling ticklish?
Most humans cannot tickle themselves because they anticipate their own actions, which alters their sense of perception, according to a new study.
Since it is now believed that a breakdown in this anticipation process may underlie the delusions in schizophrenia, the finding may also lead to a better understanding of this mental disorder.
"It's well known that you can't tickle yourself," says Associate Professor Randy Flanagan, one of the authors of the study published in the latest issue of the journal PLoS Biology.
"One explanation is that since all the sensations are completely predictable, we do 'sensory attenuation', which reduces our touch perception," says Flanagan, a Canadian psychologist at Queen's University in Ontario.
"If we try to deal with all the sensory information directed at us at any given time, it's overwhelming. We can't focus attention on crucial changes in our environment that aren't a function of our own motions." 
Scientists previously speculated that we either filter out unnecessary information after the motion or sensation occurs, or that we predict our own actions.
This would allow us to mostly ignore unnecessary sensations, such as the feel of our vocal chords while we speak, or the constant tapping of our fingers while typing at a keyboard. 
Tap, tap
To determine which of the two mechanisms is at work, the researchers asked 20 right-handed people to tap with one index finger on a force sensor that was sandwiched between the tapping finger and the other hand's passive index finger.
With each finger tap, the sensor would deliver a tapping sensation to the passive finger. 
Similar to self-tickling, the test subjects reported that the tap received by the passive finger was weak because they had anticipated the sensation.
This occurred even when part of the force sensor was removed during surprise trials where the active finger just wound up tapping the air, while the passive finger still received the expected tap. 
"We are constantly predicting the consequences of our actions," Flanagan says. "When we act on ourselves and on the world around us we predict in real time as we move."
Hearing voices
Flanagan also explains that a breakdown in this prediction process could be why people with delusional schizophrenia "hear voices" and mumble to themselves. 
"If a healthy person murmurs to himself, he knows that he is hearing his own voice," Flanagan says.
"Now imagine that the person has a deficit in the predictive mechanism. He murmurs and then suddenly hears murmuring but cannot label it as himself. As he tries to make sense of the alien voice, the explanation for it could be quite bizarre, such as thinking it is coming from a wall or the pavement." 
He is not certain whether some people with schizophrenia can tickle themselves, but since their falsely alien sensations are often accompanied by feelings of fear and paranoia, it is likely that the experience would not be pleasurable. 
Impressed
Chris Frith, a professor of neuropsychology and deputy director of the Leopold M&uuml;ller Functional Imaging Laboratory at University College London, says he is "very impressed" by the new study. 
Both Frith and Flanagan hope that the findings will help people with schizophrenia, which the US National Institute of Mental Health says affects around 51 million people worldwide. 
"[We need] robust techniques for measuring the magnitude of the [prediction] breakdown. If techniques like the one described in the PLoS Biology paper can be used with patients, then this will have a major impact on diagnosis and the monitoring of the effects of treatment," Frith says.

Footprints from people running away from Mount Vesuvius when it erupted nearly 4000 years ago, possibly part of a mass exodus
Mount Vesuvius, the volcano that buried Pompeii and nearby towns in 79AD, could erupt far more violently, US and Italian volcanologists have discovered.
Based on evidence from a powerful earlier eruption, the scientists say such an event could destroy villages and kill people as far as 25 kilometres from its summit.
Dr Giuseppe Mastrolorenzo of the Vesuvius Observatory in Italy, Professor Michael Sheridan, of the University of Buffalo in New York, and colleagues have found compelling evidence that nearly 4000 years ago, Vesuvius produced a most devastating eruption. 
The event, called the Avellino catastrophe, destroyed the area of present-day Naples, making Bronze Age farmers flee for their lives.
The researchers first examined the well-preserved remains of Nola, a village about 15 kilometres northeast of the volcano.
Digging the ash layer left by the eruption, they found evidence for "a sudden, en masse evacuation". 
"Scenes of everyday life, frozen by the volcanic deposits, testify that people suddenly left the village: the moulds of four huts, with pottery and other objects left inside; skeletons of a dog and nine pregnant goat victims found in a cage; and footprints of adults, children, and cows filled by the first fallout pumice," the researchers write in the current issue of the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 
One kilometre east of Nola, Mastrolorenzo's team found skeletons of a man and a woman buried under a metre of volcanic debris, a dramatic evidence of "their unlucky escape attempt and their death due to suffocation". 
The eruption was probably preceded by a warning blast. A 36 kilometre column of ash and gas would have spewed high up into the atmosphere and then rained down, covering about 20 kilometres.
The scientists believe that most of the 10,000 or so inhabitants of the area probably survived the eruption. Indeed, they found thousands of footprints made in the ash, all leading away from the volcano. 
Archaeological evidence indicates that some people returned and tried to set up settlements again. 
It was a vain attempt, as the deposit of millions of cubic metres of ash and small pumice fragments made the area uninhabitable for hundreds of years. 
"We have got to know Vesuvius much better. Now we know that Pompeii doesn't represent the worst-case scenario anymore," says Mastrolorenzo.
"We need to incorporate the data of this prehistoric eruption into the hazard plan. This is the most extreme scenario that could impact the city of Naples and its surroundings." 
An eruption similar to the Avellino catastrophe today would affect an area much larger than the actual danger 'red zone', which comprises a population of about 600,000 and 18 towns squashed within about a 6 kilometre radius between the volcano and the sea.
Indeed, at least 3 million people live within the area destroyed by the Avellino eruption.
"[Computer modelling shows that] within a radius of at least 12 kilometres from the volcano, the impact force and sedimentation rate of the pyroclastic surge would cause total devastation and mortality, because the inferred dynamic overpressure of surge clouds would exceed even the building strength," say the researchers. 
Some 15 kilometres away from the volcano most people would survive, though there would still be risk of suffocating from the fine dust cloud. 
"Because a volcanic crisis can start quickly, leaving only a few weeks to months for planning, it is important to use all available data to forecast the scale of potential events," Mastrolorenzo says.
"Catastrophes are often caused by the most extreme events." 
A cycle of eruptions
Vesuvius is the only active volcano on the European mainland and erupts dramatically in cycles.
According to Sheridan, while there may not be a high probability that events like the Avellino eruption or the Pompeii eruption will occur in the near future, Italian authorities must still consider those possibilities.
"There was this Bronze Age eruption about 4000 years ago, and then 2000 years ago there was the 79AD event. It seems that just about every 2000 years, there's been a major eruption of this scale at Vesuvius," says Sheridan. 
"Using a standard statistical test, there is more than a 50% chance that a violent eruption will happen at Vesuvius next year. With each year that goes by, the statistical probability increases," he says.

Do you metabolise caffeine quickly or slowly? The answer could tell you about your risk of having a heart attack
A gene that controls how fast your body breaks down caffeine might explain why some people can get away with drinking lots of coffee and others can't, new research suggests.
People with a genetic variation linked with slow caffeine metabolism are more likely to have a nonfatal heart attack, the researchers write today in the Journal of the American Medical Association. 
The researchers looked at 4024 people who lived in coffee-rich Costa Rica between 1994 and 2004. Half had had a nonfatal heart attack, and half had not. 
They found that slightly more than half had the slow version of the gene while the others had the fast form.
"We found in individuals who had the slow version of this gene, as little as two cups of coffee a day is associated with an increased risk of heart disease," says study author Dr Ahmed El-Sohemy of the University of Toronto. 
For those with the slow-acting gene, two to three cups of coffee a day increased their odds of a heart attack by 36%, and four or more cups a day increased the risk by 64%, the study says.
"For those who had the fast version of the gene, there was no increased risk, even with four or more cups a day," he says.
"Surprisingly, what we found was that in individuals under 50 years of age who were fast metabolisers consumption of as little as one to three cups a day was associated with a lower risk of heart disease." 
Those with the fast-acting gene who drank two to three cups of coffee a day had 22% reduced odds of having a heart attack, but drinking four or more cups a day lessened the risk by 1%, the study found. 
"Initially we thought that individuals who had the slow version of this gene might drink less caffeine because it stays in their system longer," El-Sohemy says.
"But what we found is that regardless of the version of the gene that the person had, it did not affect how much caffeine they consumed." 
Breaking down caffeine in the liver
The enzyme cytochrome P450 1A2 is responsible for metabolising caffeine in the liver. And variations of the gene for this enzyme can slow down or speed up caffeine metabolism.
"An individual cannot predict whether or not they have the slow or fast version of the gene, because although they can feel the effects of caffeine on the nervous system, they cannot feel the effects on their blood vessels," El-Sohemy says. 
Since tests to determine which form of the gene you carry are not readily available and you cannot feel how fast your body is getting rid of caffeine, the study's authors recommended reining in coffee consumption to no more than four cups a day.
Previous studies have offered conflicting findings about the health effects of coffee, and El-Sohemy notes other chemicals in coffee may play a role. 
 "Of all the studies that have been conducted to date that looked at the effects of either coffee or caffeine on heart disease, none of them have taken into account genetic differences in the ability to break down caffeine," El-Sohemy says.
"We are approaching the era of personalised dietary advice."

Are you looking at me?
More Australian racehorses have vision-threatening eye disease than expected, a new study shows.
About one in 13 thoroughbred horses examined may be in danger of losing their sight.
Cataracts, corneal scarring and lesions are among the serious conditions that two veterinarians report in the latest issue of the journal Veterinary Ophthalmology.
Dr Simon Hurn and colleague Dr Andrew Turner say there is a perception in the racing industry that eye disease in horses is not very common.
But they had noticed a higher than acceptable level of eye disease in performance horses and were concerned.
When they couldn't find data to compare what they had found, they decided to carry out their own research.
They conducted ophthalmic examinations on 204 flat-racing and jump-racing horses at four metropolitan and two country racing stable complexes in Victoria.
They found potential vision-threatening eye disease in 7.4% of the horses and non-vision threatening disease in 57.4%.
Generally horses' eyesight is on par with that of humans, the researchers say.
"They probably don't have the same colour spectral type vision that we have but they do see colour and they do see movement. And because they move at speed, we can also assume they have good visual acuity [sharpness] as well," says Hurn.
He adds that many of the eye findings were 'incidental' and wouldn't affect horses' vision.
"Horses don't have to read newspapers or drive cars. Most of their time is spent eating or watching out for what they think are predators," he says.
"They can do that just fine with that vision that they have and the reason they don't have the same type of colour vision that we have is that they just don't need it. Their eyesight is [good] for their environment."
Hurn says while there may well be a genetic component to the eye diseases in general, he also believes vets are getting better at diagnosing eye disease.
"We noticed a higher than normal incidence of cataracts in the population of horses, [however] and this could certainly have a genetic component," he says.

Existing remote telecommunication networks are struggling to cope with today's internet traffic, according to one expert. So how about a new de-centralised network?
Remote communities could access cheaper wireless broadband services than their city cousins via new-generation mobile phones and computers, say Australian researchers.
The devices could also be part of local community telecommunication networks independent of major centralised networks, the researchers add.
Dr Mehran Abolhasan of the University of Wollongong is heading a team that will trial the new technology in a remote Western Australian community later this year.
"Remote communities still rely on outdated technologies and very low-capacity networks that are not really able to provide today's internet traffic," says Abolhasan, a telecommunications and computer engineering expert.
One of the main reasons for this is the enormous cost of rolling out links to the latest communications hubs in the cities.
And the low population in remote areas means the return on investment is quite low.
So despite government subsidies, in Australia for example, remote communities have to pay more to get access to telecommunications than people in the city and they are often the least likely to be able to afford it.
Ad hoc networks
Abolhasan hopes he has a low-cost alternative to providing up-to-date telecommunications to remote communities.
His team is developing new software and hardware that can run what are called ad hoc networks.
The key components of the networks are small portable computer devices, such as PCs or mobile phones that can transmit as well as receive microwave signals.
Their ability to transmit means that, as well as being a PC or mobile phone, the devices can act as nodes in a communication network.
And if they are put on top of towers they can transmit messages over long distances, especially when a number of them are linked in a chain.
Ad hoc networking is cheap because of the low cost of the technology that enables wireless communication between different units, says Abolhasan, and because much of the open source software is already freely available.
"[Remote] communities would have access to a broadband-type service for a very low price," he says, "cheaper than current broadband services in the city."  
He says ad hoc networks have another advantage because they are not centralised and if devices break down they can communicate with other units and re-route messages.
Extending existing networks
Abolhasan says ad hoc networking can extend the range of existing infrastructure.
For example, if a remote community has a central building with access to a satellite network, it can extend the satellite network to individual homes.
The technology could also be used to enable communications within a community. For example people could run their own broadband television station from the local community centre.
"You can have a community private network without going through any infrastructure," says Abolhasan.
The main research challenge is to increase the capacity of the technology, which at the moment is unable to service large numbers of people at the same time, he says.
The team plans to trial ad hoc networking in an Indigenous community in Western Australia in the second half of this year.
"If it works in outback Australia, it should work just about anywhere," says Abolhasan.
He says ad hoc networks don't need much power and could run on solar power. He expects the technology to be available in the next three to five years.
The project is funded by the Desert Knowledge Co-operative Research Centre in Alice Springs.

Carbon dating is shedding new light on ancient scrolls and what they tell us about the history of Buddhism
Rare manuscripts dubbed the 'Dead Sea Scrolls of Buddhism' are indeed from the 1st and 5th centuries AD, carbon dating shows.
The manuscripts, which were written on fragile birch bark, provide an important insight into the development of Buddhist literature and help fill the gaps in some areas of Buddhist history.
Buddhism was traditionally a spoken tradition and until now, little has been known about how it developed from the spoken to the written word.
While Buddhism flourished throughout Asia, it disappeared from India, Central Asia and the Indonesian archipelago, taking with it many literary traditions.
"When we first learnt about these manuscripts we looked at the scripts and the language and made a rough estimate of their approximate age," says Dr Mark Allon, from the University of Sydney, an Australian researcher who is translating the text.
Carbon dating, conducted by researchers from the Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation, confirmed the assessment.
The scientists used the process of accelerator mass spectrometry to radiocarbon date the bark on which the manuscipts were written.
This process counts the rare carbon-14 isotopes in a sample and uses this to calculate the sample's approximate age based on the radioactive decay over time.
Two manuscripts from the Senior collection, which is named after the scrolls' British owner, date to between 130 and 250AD 
And three manuscripts from the Sch&oslash;yen text, named after the scrolls' Norwegian owner, date to between the 1st and 5th century AD.
Allon says the Senior collection dating is particularly important because it makes a major contribution to Indian Buddhism chronology.
"One of the manuscripts we studied was found in a pot with an inscription on it indicating that it was donated in the year 12. While it didn't say what era that was, the characteristics of the inscription tell us that it must refer to the Kanishka era."
Kanishka was a very important king in northern India in about the 1st or 2nd century AD, but the dates he lived and ruled have been debated for a century or more. 
"What the carbon dates told us was that the earlier date favoured by some scholars, namely 78AD, is no longer tenable because the carbon dates tell us that the manuscripts actually dated from 130AD to 250AD." 
The manuscripts are believed to have originated from Afghanistan and are among many archaeological artefacts that were sold on the international market in times of war.

Gamma-ray bursts like this are among the few things energetic enough to be seen from such a distance
The discovery of the most distance and ancient stellar explosion has now been confirmed and pushed back another 100 million light-years to 12.8 billion light-years away. 
The explosion, known as GRB 050904, took place when the universe was a relatively youthful 900 million years old. 
The fatal stellar scream, beamed from a giant star as it collapsed to make a black hole, contains direct clues to what the universe was like so long ago. 
A gamma-ray burst, or GRB, is one of the few things in the universe bright enough to be seen so long and far away. 
Three separate international teams of astronomers, including observations from Australia's Mount Stromlo and Siding Spring Observatories, describe the GRB in the journal Nature today. 
Among them is Assistant Professor Daniel Reichart of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
He began to suspect his team was seeing something unusual when the researchers detected the afterglow of the blast in infrared light, but could not see it in visible light, as is normally the case.
The gamma rays were initially detected from the space-borne Swift telescope and burst detector. The rest of the observations were made from earthbound telescopes. 
"At that point we either had found the most distant burst in the universe, or there was dust in the way," Reichart says. 
Could it be dust?
A careful analysis of just which wavelengths of light were missing from GRB 050904 made it clear dust was not the culprit, he explains. 
"Dust scatters blue light out, but it's much more gradual," says Reichart. 
GRB 050904's bluer light drops off very suddenly. That's the signature of the light having been stretched out, essentially making it redder (called redshift), over billions of years of travel through an expanding universe. 
In a way, it's the wavelengths of light that didn't make it across time and space that pegged GRB 050904 as the oldest and furthest star ever seen.
But the light that did survive the journey has a lot to offer as well.
"Its attraction lies in what it can reveal about star formation early in the history of the universe," says astrophysicist Dr Enrico Ramirez-Ruiz of the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, who writes about the importance of the discovery in the same issue of Nature.
Because all light, when broken into a spectrum, carries essentially a bar code of the elements that created or influenced it, the light from GRB 050904 could reveal a lot about where and when heavy elements become more common in the early universe. 
"Distant galaxies are themselves difficult to study because they appear faint and small," Ramirez-Ruiz explains.
"GRBs will serve not only as signposts to such galaxies, but could be used to study the gradual build-up of heavy elements in them to determine the conversion history of primordial gas into stars." 
The first generation of stars in the universe was made of hydrogen and helium alone. Heavier elements are made by the most massive stars when they die.
Even at the colossal distance of 12.8 billion light-years, GRB 050904 is not quite old enough to be among the first generation of stars, say astronomers. 
That's because large stars that can create GRBs have relatively short lifespans.
Our Sun, in contrast, is a medium-sized star which, at about 4.5 billion years old, is only middle-aged for its kind.

Snuppy, on the right, with the three-year-old male Afghan hound whose somatic skin cells were used to clone him
Two DNA tests have backed claims by disgraced South Korean scientist Professor Hwang Woo-Suk that he made the world's first cloned dog, Snuppy.
The investigations are published today by the journal Nature, which printed the original research last August, five months before Hwang was exposed as a fraud for his work in stem cells. 
Snuppy, short for Seoul National University puppy, initially stirred admiration among scientists as dogs are among the trickiest of animals to clone.
But this feeling quickly ceded to suspicion when the stem cell scandal broke. 
One of the inquiries was conducted by a panel at the university, where Hwang carried out the work at the College of Veterinary Medicine, Nature says.
The panel had already announced in January that Snuppy is believed to be a genuine clone.
This investigation was then double-checked by genome specialists led by Dr Elaine Ostrander at the US National Institutes of Health, using samples provided  by the Seoul team.
The two investigations entailed making a DNA fingerprint of Snuppy, looking notably for microsatellites, telltale markers on the genome.
They then compared microsatellites between the puppy and his genetic donor, a three-year-old Afghan hound named Tai; the surrogate mother, a yellow Labrador retriever; the unidentified donor of the egg; and other pedigree dogs. 
Perfect match
The tests showed a perfect match between Snuppy and Tai, confirming that Snuppy was created by placing Tai's DNA in the empty donated egg, the scientists say. 
"It is highly unlikely that Snuppy came either from extreme inbreeding or from twinning," says the Seoul panel. "It is virtually certain that Snuppy was generated from somatic-cell nuclear transfer, as claimed." 
Somatic-cell nuclear transfer entails taking an egg and removing the nucleus, which is then replaced by the nucleus of an adult cell taken from the animal to be cloned.
The reconstructed egg is then given a jolt of electricity or treated to a chemical cocktail to make it divide, and placed in a bath of nurturing chemicals to continue growing.
The embryo is then placed in the uterus of a surrogate mother, which if all goes well brings it to term. 
This technique was used for the first cloned mammal, Dolly the sheep, in 1997, and has been used on a dozen other species since then. 
Dogs, though, have been a big challenge because it is hard to acquire mature canine eggs. 
In contrast to other mammals, dogs ovulate when their eggs are immature. The eggs then go to a special duct to mature for two or three days. 
Hwang's team cracked this problem by gently flushing out the oviduct to recover the mature eggs. The technique could be useful for conservationists who want to preserve rare species whose eggs are difficult to harvest, scientists say. 
In trouble with stem cells
Hwang, 52, astonished gene scientists last May when he claimed to have created 11 lines of stem cells that were identical to the DNA of their donors. 
But Hwang plunged into disgrace when it was discovered that this research, published in the journal Science, was fabricated.
Similar accusations surround a 2004 Science paper in which he claimed to have produced a stem cell from a cloned human embryo.

Professor Rusi Taleyarkhan with his tabletop device that he says delivers cold fusion with bubbles
A scientist who says he has achieved 'cold fusion' using sound waves to make bubbles is being investigated by his current university after complaints from colleagues.
Nuclear engineer Professor Rusi Taleyarkhan's work has been controversial since he published a study in 2002 claiming to have achieved the Holy Grail of energy production, nuclear fusion at room temperature. 
If scientists can duplicate the results and harness the technology, which is based on the process that powers the Sun, tabletop fusion has the potential to provide an almost limitless source of cheap energy. 
Many labs are working frantically to try to do so, but their efforts are difficult to substantiate and especially susceptible to being labelled as fraud. 
Taleyarkhan, whose study was published while he was at the US Department of Energy's Oak Ridge National Laboratory in Tennessee, now works at Purdue University in Indiana and has also been trying to replicate his earlier findings. 
He says he did this in 2004. 
Purdue provost Sally Mason says her office is checking complaints from some of Taleyarkhan's co-workers. 
"Purdue last week initiated a review of this research and these allegations," Mason says. 
"The research claims involved are very significant and the concerns expressed are extremely serious. Purdue will explore all aspects of the situation thoroughly and announce the results at the appropriate time," she adds. 
"To ensure objectivity, the review is being conducted by Purdue's Office of the Vice President for Research, which is separate from the College of Engineering." 
Something amiss?
The journal Nature reports today it has interviewed several of Taleyarkhan's colleagues who suspect something is amiss. 
"Faculty members Lefteri Tsoukalas and Tatjana Jevremovic, along with several others who do not wish to be named, say that since Taleyarkhan began working at Purdue, he has removed the equipment with which they were trying to replicate his work, claimed as 'positive' experimental runs for which they never saw the raw data, and opposed the publication of their own negative results," according to Nature. 
"In addition, Brian Naranjo at the University of California, Los Angeles, is submitting to Physical Review Letters an analysis of Taleyarkhan's recently published data that strongly suggests he has detected not fusion, but a standard lab source of radioactivity." 
Naranjo's lab reported in April 2005 that it had achieved cold fusion by heating a lithium crystal soaked in deuterium gas. 
Engineers and physicists have been cautious about Taleyarkhan's technique but say in theory it could work. 
In the original report
In his original report, published in the journal Science in 2002, Talayarkhan and colleagues say they created nuclear fusion in a beaker of chemically altered acetone by bombarding it with neutrons and then sound waves to make bubbles. 
When the bubbles burst, the researchers say they detected fusion energy. 
The 2004 experiment used uranyl nitrate, a salt of natural uranium. 
Experts have been especially sceptical about cold fusion claims since Britons Professor Martin Fleischmann and Stanley Pons of the University of Southampton held a news conference in 1989 to claim they had achieved it. 
Fleischmann and Pons were ridiculed when no-one could duplicate their efforts.

A new type of tourism is taking off
People with diabetes are flying to a clinic in Mexico for an injection of pig cells, hoping this xenotransplant will cure them.
But experts are worried about the risks involved with this so-called xenotourism or xenotravel, both to the patient and to the rest of the community.
Peta Cook, a PhD student at Queensland University of Technology's Centre for Social Change Research will present her research on xenotourism at a meeting of the Transplantation Society of Australia and New Zealand in Canberra later this month.
Xenotourism is where someone specifically goes to another country for a xenotransplant, the transplant of animal tissue or organs to treat conditions like diabetes.
Australia currently bans xenotransplantation, mainly because it could transfer infectious diseases from animals to humans.
In other countries, such as the US, clinical trials are being carried out under strict regulation.
But xenotransplants are available today to the general public for over US$35,000 (A$47,000).
The Laboratorio de Xenotransplantes in Mexico has been offering pig cell transplants to the world since 2004 to treat diabetes.
Cook says her correspondence with the clinic confirms patients from a country in the northern hemisphere were admitted in 2005.
"They confirmed with me that there were two people who had already received the therapy in January and February last year and since returned to their home country and they had two more people who were coming across to have a consultation," Cook says.
"They were looking at doing about one a month as an international patient but of course that could be stepped up."
Experts urge caution
The International Xenotransplantation Association (IXA) says xenotransplantation might introduce new infections from animals, so requires "extreme caution".
The clinic in Mexico states on its website that its pigs are raised in "pathogen free farms" and the "isolated cells are examined to establish the levels of purity, viability, functionality, sterility and then cultured before being transplanted".
The risk of infection is "extremely low", it states, adding it has been authorised by a range of Mexican government institutions.
But the international expert community is concerned there's no way of checking what Mexico is doing.
"They claim that they have approval from local and government authorities for this activity but there is no formal regulatory authority," says Professor Anthony d'Apice of St Vincent's Hospital in Melbourne, who is IXA's immediate past president.
IXA and WHO are calling for the establishment of international standards on which animals can be used for xenotransplants and which tests should be carried out to ensure infection doesn't occur.
They also say patients given xenotransplants need to be monitored closely to see if they get sick afterwards.
While the clinic in Mexico requires patients to visit their GP and endocrinologists in their home country, other experts say this is not enough.
D'Apice says infectious diseases experts should be involved in the monitoring.
Under the quarantine radar
Normally if you bring live animal material into Australia it has to go through quarantine. But when the animal material is inside someone, it's not exactly obvious.
"There is no quarantine status that says you must declare that you've had a porcine transplant," says d'Apice, whose research involves genetically modifying pigs to stop rejection of their pancreas and kidney cells when they are transplanted into non-human primates.
"If you go from the United States, down to Mexico, have a transplant, and fly back into the United States you don't tick on your immigration, quarantine or any other form that you've been potentially exposed to this type of risk.
"I think we place ourself at some risk from xenotourism."
While he is short on recommendations on what Australia should do about this, he says Australia should help lobby at the international level for uniform standards.
But Cook says we can't wait for international standards because xenotourism is already happening. 
She says Australia should address the issue now, despite its moratorium, which d'Apice predicts will be lifted in just two or three years.
The problem is, though few people, even in the expert community, are even aware that xenotourism is happening, says Cook, least of all GPs who would be on the frontline of any fallout from xenotourism.
"If I get a xenotransplant I could walk in to my doctor and have a sore throat and just be diagnosed with a sore throat and be told to suck on some lozenges when if fact I could have something a lot more serious going on," she says. 
D'Apice agrees this could be a problem.
"A GP would have absolutely no idea about this," he says.
The Royal Australian College of General Practitioners was unavailable for comment.

Sitting in cramped conditions on a long-haul flight isn't the main risk factor for DVT, researchers say. The cabin air quality may be to blame
Low cabin air pressure and poor oxygenation enhance the risk of deep-vein thrombosis (DVT) in susceptible passengers, a study suggests.
Until now, DVT has been most widely associated with remaining inactive for long periods, like in the cramped conditions of an aircraft cabin.
But a study in today's issue of The Lancet journal suggests there may be additional risk factors.
DVT occurs when a clot forms in leg veins during periods of sedentary activity. The clot can then migrate to the heart, lung or brain, sometimes days or weeks later, and inflict a heart attack or stroke. 
Even though the phenomenon has been known since World War II, it has in recent years become a major issue for the airline industry, through lawsuits in which people who have had DVT place the blame on cramped economy seating in long flights.
The airlines retort that DVT can occur long after a flight, which thus makes it impossible to establish a link, and point out that clotting can occur in other forms of sedentary activity, even from sitting and reading a book. 
The latest research puts the ball back into the airlines' court, pointing the finger at cabin air quality as a potential risk factor. 
A team led by Professor Frits Rosendaal of Leiden University Medical Center in the Netherlands, monitored levels of a key clotting protein called thrombin-antithrombin (TAT) complex among 71 healthy men and women aged 20-39. 
A total of 40% of the people in the study were selected as they took the contraceptive pill, had a gene variation called factor V Leiden, or both, conditions which greatly increase the risk of blood clotting. 
Up, up and away
The volunteers were taken onboard a specially-chartered Boeing 757 for a non-stop eight-hour flight.
It cruised at around 11,000 metres with a cabin pressure that corresponds to an altitude of 1800-2100 metres. 
Blood samples were taken before, during and after the flight. 
A couple of weeks later, the same group underwent the same tests, but this time at a movie marathon, watching comedy and action films for eight hours. 
They were not allowed to drink alcohol, take aspirin or wear elastic stockings during the flight or the movies, and were asked to remain seated as much as possible. 
The group was monitored for the final time during eight hours of regular daily activity. 
After the flight, the concentration of TAT complex rose by about 30% on average across the group. It fell by about 2% after the cinema, and by almost 8% after the 'daily life' experiment. 
The post-flight rise was overwhelmingly concentrated in just 11 of the 71 individuals, especially those who took oral contraceptives and also had factor V Leiden. 
The findings suggest that "flight-associated factors" are the cause behind increased clot formation after a long trip, say the team, which conducted the study for the WHO.
The researchers put the ring of suspicion around hypobaric hypoxia, a combination of low cabin pressure and a low oxygen level compared with terrestrial air conditions. 
Who's most at risk?
The data also provides a useful pointer for medical help to those most at risk. 
There already exists an array of simple techniques or over-the-counter drugs for combatting DVT. 
These include cutting out alcohol on a flight, stretching one's legs, taking an aspirin and wearing compressive stockings that improve blood circulation. 
There is also a powerful anti-clotting prescription drug called heparin. 
This medication has side-effects, which means it should be targeted at those most at risk, such as women on the pill and with factor V Leiden, cancer patients and recent surgery patients, says Dr Hans Stricker, a doctor at the Charity Hospital in Locarno, Switzerland, in a commentary. 
Previous studies have found a two-to-fourfold risk of DVT after air travel, while a study in 2003 estimated that DVT may occur among one in every 100 frequent long-haul air travellers, in business class as well as economy.

Plumes of icy material shoot out from the moon's south pole
One of Saturn's moons, Enceladus, is spewing out a giant plume of water vapour that is probably feeding one of the planet's rings, scientists say.
The findings, published in the journal Science, suggest that tiny Enceladus could have a liquid ocean under its icy surface which in theory could sustain primitive life, similar to Jupiter's moon Europa.
The plume was spotted by Cassini, a joint US-European spacecraft that is visiting Saturn.
"We realise that this is a radical conclusion, that we may have evidence for liquid water within a body so small and so cold," says Dr Carolyn Porco, Cassini imaging team leader at the Space Science Institute in Boulder, Colorado. 
"However, if we are right, we have significantly broadened the diversity of solar system environments where we might possibly have conditions suitable for living organisms."
Scientists have long known that many of Saturn's moons have water. They took an especially close look at Enceladus because it seemed to have a smooth surface, suggesting recent geological activity that, in turn, could mean liquid water. 
Liquid water is a key requirement for life. Several moons have been found to have evidence of liquid water and the chemical elements needed to make life, including Europa. 
Gigantic geyser
But scientists are far more intrigued by the plume itself, a gigantic geyser of water vapour and tiny ice particles. 
"It's basically this giant plume of gas coming out of the south pole of Enceladus," says Dr Candy Hansen of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California.
"The plume is half the size of the moon. It's huge," says Hansen, a planetary scientist.
"Water is being spewed out of this moon. It solves some real mysteries that we have been struggling with over the years." 
Indirect observations have shown the moon, discovered in 1789 by William Herschel, is rich in oxygen and hydrogen. But whether this is because of water is not clear. 
Both water vapour and water particles were observed, as well as a smattering of other compounds such as methane and carbon dioxide, the international team of scientists reports in a series of papers in Science. 
It is possible the plume comes directly from ice, but more likely there is a liquid source, the researchers say. It would have to be under the moon's surface, which is covered with ice. 
"If a wet domain exists at the bottom of Enceladus' icy crust, like a miniature Europan ocean, Cassini may help to confirm it," Dr Jeffrey Kargel of the University of Arizona at Tucson writes in a commentary.
"Might it be a habitat? Cassini cannot answer this question," Kargel adds. 
"Any life that existed could not be luxuriant and would have to deal with low temperatures, feeble metabolic energy, and perhaps a severe chemical environment. Nevertheless, we cannot discount the possibility that Enceladus might be life's distant outpost." 
Hansen is cautious. 
"I think the best you can say is there is biological potential. We have liquid water probably, and it is in contact with rocks so there are minerals," she says.
"And there is energy. But we haven't detected life." 
The findings help to confirm theories that Enceladus was the source of Saturn's outer E-ring, the researchers say. 
Saturn has at least 47 known moons. Enceladus is named after a Titan in Greek mythology who was defeated in battle and buried under Mount Etna by the goddess Athena.

The new technology allows online gamers to talk and listen to others in a crowd
Online gaming characters will one-day have more realistic voices, say researchers who are working on a system that makes nearby characters sound louder than distant ones.
The Australian researchers say their technology will also make other forms of communication in the virtual world - whether for work, study or play - more like real life.
Dr Paul Boustead from the University of Wollongong says this technology will be useful in the gaming world, where players generally communicate by typing text to each other.
Typing is quite demanding, says Boustead, especially for those involved in some games that can have millions of active players.
Boustead says the main problem with current 'voice over internet' technology is that it is one-dimensional; there is no relationship between how someone's voice sounds and the position they are at in the virtual landscape.
But in the new system, a person's voice 'moves' around with their online character.
This makes it possible to have multiple online conversations going on at the same time. People can get closer to those they want to hear and move away from those they are less interested in hearing.
"The idea is that you can walk into a virtual crowd," says Boustead.
"You can talk to people just like in normal life, in real life. And it's quite a comfortable way of communicating with people. People are actually very used to it."
Immersed in a virtual world
For games and other virtual reality devices, this means people can become even more immersed in their virtual world.
"With our system you see through the eyes of your character, you see these other characters which other people are controlling, and you hear them from where they look like they are in the game," says Boustead.
"So if someone is way up in front you'll hear them just slightly off in the distance in the front," he says. "If they're right up close they'll be loud."
He says being able to talk to others in a crowd is important for players in computer games where co-operation with a small group within a crowd is crucial to winning. 
It also means you can focus on the task at hand, rather than typing to communicate in text, says Boustead.
He says the new technology could also be useful for virtual classrooms where students want to listen to the teacher and then form small discussion groups.
The technology could be useful for corporate meetings, interactive online conferences or other events, says Boustead.
"You could have a cocktail party online," says Boustead. "It could be kind of cool."
Delivering the service
The main restrictions on voice over internet has been a lack of bandwidth because having numerous voices and information that identifies their location in space involves a lot of data.
But Boustead says his team has been developing technology that will allow such information to be sent via normal consumer broadband internet.
The system involves an audio server, which creates 'audio scenes', connected to devices on PCs.
Telstra has been running a trial using the voice technology with several online computer games over the last few months with a small group of broadband users.
The research is funded by the Smart Internet Technology CRC.

Laonastes is the only living representative of the otherwise extinct Distomydae, a family of rodents that lived in south Asia and Japan
A squirrel-like rodent found last year in Laos has been identified as belonging to a family of rodents thought to have died out 11 million years ago, scientists says.
A team of US, French and Chinese researchers compared the live animal's skeleton to the fossils of a family of rodents that lived in Asia in the early Oligocene to late Miocene eras.
They confirm, in the latest issue of the journal Science, that it belonged to the same mammalian family.
When the animal was discovered, it made the headlines as biologists thought it belonged to a new family of animals, rather than just a new species of an existing family. 
They named it Laonastes aenigmamus, or Laotian rock rat. 
In fact it belongs to the family Diatomyidae and resembles a small squirrel but is not a rat, says palaeontologist Dr Mary Dawson, of the Carnegie Museum of Natural History in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. 
Diatomyidae lived during the middle Tertiary period, 34 to 11 million years ago, in southern Asia, central China and Japan.
They were medium sized rodents and had characteristic molar teeth and jaw structure.
The researchers say the rodent is an example of the 'Lazarus effect', when an organism suddenly reappears after a long gap in the fossil record.
Finding an animal thought to be extinct is even more exciting than discovering a new species, says Dr George Schaller, the Wildlife Conservation Society biologist who stumbled across the new animal last year.
The rodent is a nocturnal mammal that inhabits a remote Laotian jungle, and is known to local ethnic groups who call it kha-nyou. 
Scientist have been unable so far to see a live specimen. The only one found had been killed by hunters and was put on sale at a local market where it was spotted by conservation society researchers.

The rainbow serpent, a key Aboriginal Dreamtime creation symbol, is closely connected with Indigenous knowledge of groundwater systems
Indigenous Australians dug underground water reservoirs that helped them live on one of the world's driest continents for tens of thousands of years, new research shows.
The study, which is the first of its kind, indicates Aboriginal people had extensive knowledge of the groundwater system, says hydrogeologist Brad Moggridge, knowledge that is still held today.
Some 70% of the continent is covered by desert or semi-arid land, which meant its original inhabitants needed to know how to find and manage this resource if they were to survive.
"Aboriginal people survived on one of the driest continents for thousands and thousands of years," says Brad Moggridge, who is from Kamilaroi country in northern New South Wales.
"Without water you die. They managed that water sustainably."
Moggridge, currently a principal policy officer in the New South Wales Department of Environment and Conservation, did his research as part of a Masters degree at the University of Technology, Sydney.
He based his work on oral histories, Dreamtime stories, rock art, artefacts and ceremonial body painting as well as written accounts by white missionaries, surveyors, settlers, anthropologists and explorers.
Managing scant resources
Moggridge says Indigenous Australians channelled and filtered their water, covering it to avoid contamination and evaporation. They also created wells and tunnel reservoirs.
"Groundwater was accessed through natural springs or people used to dig tunnels to access it," he says.
"Sometimes they'd dig till they found the water and then they'd build a system so they could access the water. Sometimes they've go fairly deep and people would slither down there and get their water."
Aboriginal people also used terrain, birdlife, vegetation and animals as markers for water, Moggridge says.
For example, they followed dingos to rock pools and waterholes while ants led them to subterranean reservoirs.
"They used the landscape," he says. "For example, you're in a dry area and all of a sudden there's a large number of ghost gums, so you'd think there must be some groundwater."
The Dreamtime
Aboriginal people's understanding of their groundwater system permeates Dreamtime stories, Moggridge says.
For example, the rainbow serpent is a key symbol of creation but its journey from underground to the surface also represents groundwater rising to the top via springs.
Moggridge says European settlers owed their subsequent knowledge of groundwater to local tribes and trackers, and even much of Australia's modern road system is based on water sources identified by the original inhabitants.
"A lot of the old roads in New South Wales are based on Aboriginal walking tracks and their water supply would have been along the way," he says.
The Desert Knowledge CRC is also trying to link traditional knowledge with science in terms of water management in central Australia, home to numerous remote Indigenous communities.
Current projects include looking at the cultural values of water, a spokesperson says.

Letting worrying or persistent thoughts into your head before you go to sleep is the best way to avoid having dreams or nightmares about them
Advice to forget about your worries before bedtime can backfire, according to new research.
An Australian study has found that trying to banish unwanted thoughts, like money problems or relationship dramas, actually leads to having more dreams or nightmares.
The study, published online in the journal Behaviour Research and Therapy, found the phenomenon more pronounced in people who tend to shut out their worries.
Lead researcher Professor Richard Bryant, a psychologist from the University of New South Wales and colleagues evaluated the effect of thought suppression on dreams in 100 psychology students at the university. 
The students were asked to nominate an unwanted thought that regularly intrudes their minds.
The group that actively suppressed the nominated thought just before dropping off to sleep reported more dreams featuring the unwanted thought compared to the group that did not suppress it.
Bryant says that when the mind tries to block out unwanted thoughts it searches for alternative thoughts that prevent the unwanted thought from coming to mind (distraction), and monitors for any sign of the unwanted thought (detection). 
"People who are highly anxious, or have a lot of things on their mind, the distraction process suffers, allowing the detection process to predominate, and they are going to think more about the unwanted thoughts," he says.
Theories suggest the tendency to suppress certain thoughts leads to a higher susceptibility to psychiatric difficulties that involve intrusive thoughts, including depression, anxiety and obsessional thinking. 
In the extreme, Bryant says, trying to suppress unwanted thoughts can lead to insomnia, psychological distress and fear of going to sleep.  
Let the thoughts flow 
"Most modern therapies for anxiety disorders, where thought intrusions are a core feature, now concentrate on getting the person to focus on their intrusive thoughts rather than suppress them," says Bryant.
Bryant points out that intrusive thoughts are not always negative. Teenagers not wishing to keep thinking about a girlfriend or boyfriend when they are meant to be concentrating on other things can find themselves dealing with the same paradox, Bryant says.
"The research will help us to shed light on how to manage unwanted thoughts more effectively. If you want to stop a thought bothering you, the best thing you can do is let the subject pop into your mind rather than try to suppress it."

Stem cells harvested from young women's menstrual blood have a longer lifespan than those from older women
Japanese researchers have harvested stem cells from human menstrual blood, a medical conference has heard.
The researchers say these stem cells could be coaxed into forming specialised heart cells, which might one-day be used to treat failing or damaged hearts.
At the meeting of the American College of Cardiology, Dr Shunichiro Miyoshi reported that he and his colleagues at Keio University in Tokyo collected menstrual blood from six women and harvested stem cells that originated in the lining of the uterus.
They were able to obtain about 30 times more stem cells from menstrual blood than from bone marrow, Miyoshi says. 
The stem cells were then cultured in a way to induce them to become heart cells.
After five days about half of the cells contracted "spontaneously, rhythmical and synchronously, suggesting the presence of electrical communication" between the cells, Miyoshi says.
That is to say, they behaved like heart cells. 
The researcher explains that already stem cells derived from bone marrow have improved heart function, mainly by producing new blood vessels rather than new heart-muscle tissue.
He emphasises that it is important that these cells be obtained from younger patients, because they would have a longer lifespan than cells harvested from older donors.

This exoplanet is 13 times the mass of Earth and is shown here with a hypothetical moon
A cold, heavy 'super-Earth' has been found orbiting a distant star, using a method that holds promise for detecting faraway planets that closely resemble our own, astronomers say. 
The planet weighs 13 times as much as Earth and is orbiting a star about 9000 light-years away.
But instead of circling close to its star, as Earth does, this super-Earth is about as distant from its star as Jupiter and Saturn are from the Sun. 
An international team of scientists says the new planet probably has a temperature of minus 201&deg;C, making it one of the coldest planets detected outside our solar system. 
The discovery is billed as a super-Earth because it is thought to be a rocky, terrestrial planet like Earth, even though it is much more massive.
The planet was detected by astronomers using a project called OGLE, short for Optical Gravitational Lensing Experiment, which looks for changes in light coming from distant stars.
If another star passes between the faraway star and a telescope on Earth, the gravity of the intervening star acts like a lens and magnifies the incoming light. 
When a planet is orbiting the closer star, the planet's gravity can add its own distinctive signature to the light. 
This phenomenon is known as gravitational microlensing, and it has the potential to detect less massive planets than other methods of searching for planets around other stars. 
Lots of super-Earths
The OGLE project detected the microlensing event in April; a total of 36 astronomers working with OGLE found the signs of a planet, 9000 light-years away in the direction of the Milky Way's central galactic bulge. 
A light-year is about 10 trillion kilometres, the distance light travels in a year. 
Professor Andrew Gould of Ohio State University who heads the planet-hunting group MicroFUN, short for Microlensing Follow-Up Network, says this discovery has two implications. 
"First, this icy super-Earth dominates the region around its star that in our solar system is populated by the gas-giant planets, Jupiter and Saturn," Gould says.
"We've never seen a system like this before, because we've never had the means to find them. 
"And second these icy super-Earths are pretty common. Roughly 35% of all stars have them."
The researchers report their find on arXiv, a website run by Cornell University.
In the past decade, scientists have detected some 170 so-called extrasolar planets, using a variety of techniques. The vast majority are gas giant planets like Jupiter that are hostile to life as it is known on Earth. 
In January, a planet about five-and-a-half times Earth's mass circling a star near the center of the Milky Way was detected using gravitational microlensing.

A circular shape protects certain proteins from being chewed up by enzymes. So could these super-tough proteins be used to deliver drugs?
Humans appear to have lost what may have been a natural resistance to HIV some 7 million years when our bodies stopped producing particular kinds of protein, an Australian scientist says.
These circular proteins, called cyclotides, were discovered by Professor David Craik from the University of Queensland and colleagues, about 10 years ago.
Craik reports new insights into these molecules in the current issue of the journal Science.
The first cyclotide discovered in mammals, RTD1, was found in rhesus monkeys and when chemically synthesised acts against HIV.
Craik says humans have the genetic material to produce RTD1 but we don't make it because during evolution we apparently developed a mutation, which put a "stop code" on its production.
"It seems that somewhere between 7 and 10 million years ago some primates retained this mutation," Craik says.
"It's an ironic twist of fate because if it wasn't for that mutation you and I would have a gene that would produce a potent anti-HIV agent."
The discovery could also explain why some people have apparent immunity to HIV, Craik says.
"There may be some populations that don't have the stop code," he says.
Help during childbirth
Craick reported his discovery of the first cyclotide in 1995 after analysing a small circular protein from a medicinal tea given to Congo tribeswoman during childbirth.
"We discovered that this molecule had a circular backbone and a knotted arrangement that made it virtually indestructible," he says. It was completely resistant to enzymes and boiling.
"We thought it was unusual that a protein could be so stable and that's why we tried to find out the structure."
Almost all of the 100 or so cyclotides discovered so far have come from plants, animals and bacteria.
Cyclotides
His investigations show that while normal proteins are a linear chain of amino acids, cyclotides have "stitched up ends" that protect them from degradation.
"There are a lot of enzymes around whose job it is to degrade proteins," he says.
"They target the ends of proteins, and chop away at the ends. 
"Cyclotides are therefore resistant to degradation because they are joined from head to tail to form a circle."
Cyclotides are also naturally occurring, compared to other small circular proteins, or cyclic peptides, which have either been physically manipulated in the lab or "arranged" by a chemical interaction in the body.
Craik says some of these peptides have been identified as promising drug leads but they fall down as medicines because they basically get chewed up by enzymes once they're swallowed. 
"As far as your body's concerned a protein drug is the same as a piece of steak, all it wants to do is chew it up," he says.
But natural cyclotides can be toxic.
Delivering drugs
Craik says the solution is to chemically engineer cyclotides to remove their toxicity, then graft active peptides onto them, using the construct to deliver drugs.
"We're engineering out the toxic effects and engineering in the biological activity," he says.
Craik is working on this principle using plant cyclotides and is currently commercialising a drug for multiple sclerosis.

Tiny speck of comet dust, less than 500 micrometres long, and its track embedded in low-density glass
Scientists studying comet samples returned by the Stardust spacecraft have uncovered a cosmic conundrum. How did minerals that form in extremely hot temperatures end up inside an icy comet? 
"When they formed, they were either red-hot or white-hot and we found them in the Siberia of the solar system," says Stardust lead scientist Professor Donald Brownlee, with the University of Washington. 
The Stardust spacecraft was launched in February 1999 and flew by Comet Wild 2 (pronounced 'vilt 2') five years later.
The comet formed in the frigid Kuiper Belt region located beyond Neptune's orbit and was a relatively new traveller to the inner solar system when it encountered the NASA probe. 
Samples from the comet were collected by the spacecraft in trays of exposed gel and returned to Earth in January. 
The discovery of exotic, high-temperature minerals rich in calcium, aluminum and titanium complicate generally accepted theories about how comets form. 
Far from simple icy bodies with clouds of gas and dust, comets, or at least Comet Wild 2, now appear to be a blend of materials formed at all temperature ranges. 
Forging metals
Brownlee and other Stardust researchers expect to learn whether the high-temperature metals were forged near the center of the nebular cloud that eventually became our solar system or whether they come from another star. 
"If it was formed in our solar system, then it had to be transported from the hottest regions to the coolest," says Brownlee. 
The samples also show a rich supply of olivine, an iron-magnesium blend of minerals, which on Earth can be found in peridot gemstones and in the green sand on some Hawaiian beaches. 
Though it is one of the most common minerals in the universe, scientists did not expect to find it in a comet. 
Olivine forms in temperatures of about 1100&deg;C, which means the mineral would have had to form closer to the Sun than Mercury and then somehow be flung out more than 45 times the distance of the Sun to Earth. 
Researchers plan extensive studies to determine the chemical histories of the sample particles, which will eventually reveal whether the grains came from our solar system or another star. 
"We will know soon," Brownlee said at the annual Lunar and Planetary Institute's science conference, which opened this week.
Between 150 and 200 samples from the comet are currently circulating among scientists and research labs across the world. 
Next month, work begins on another set of samples collected during the mission: interstellar dust grains. 
Unlike the comet samples, the bits of interstellar dust picked up during Stardust's travels are tiny. 
Scientists plan an internet-based detection program of volunteers who will use their home computers to scrutinise images and try to identify any particles. The project, called Stardust@Home, begins in April.

This false-colour image of Earth shows heat escaping to space. Greenhouse gases trap such heat to warm the planet
Greenhouse gases in 2004 reached their highest ever levels in the atmosphere, says the UN's meteorological agency.
A bulletin from the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) says the gases carbon dioxide (CO2), methane and nitrous oxide "all reached new highs in 2004". 
Officials also indicate that a near record year-on-year rise in CO2 levels for 2005 recorded by US monitors, well above the average for the past 10 years, would not come as a major surprise. 
"Global observations coordinated by WMO show that levels of CO2, the most abundant greenhouse gas in the atmosphere, continue to increase steadily and show no signs of levelling off," says WMO secretary-general Michel Jarraud.
In its first Greenhouse Gas Bulletin, to be an annual publication, the WMO says that in 2004 atmospheric CO2 levels stood at 377.1 parts per million, 35% higher than in the pre-industrial age, before about 1750.
Methane has risen 155% in the modern age, the WMO says, but its growth is slowing.
And nitrous oxide is rising consistently, with levels increasing 18% in modern times.
The WMO says these three gases alone contribute to about 88% of warming over the same period.
The average annual increase in absolute amounts of CO2 in the atmosphere over the past decade has been 1.9 parts per million, slightly higher than the 1.8 parts per million of 2004, says WMO environment division chief Dr Leonard Barrie.
Barrie says reports by National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration that CO2 had grown last year by 2.6 parts per million had to be viewed in perspective.
"It is important to take the long view. There can be fluctuations," he says. "The 2.6 parts per million figure is within past experience. If it were to persist over several years, then we would have to start talking about what it means."

Recurrent miscarriages could be prevented if women prone to thrombophilia are given the correct treatment, new research finds
Women who have had recurrent miscarriages should be checked for a tendency to develop blood clots as treating the condition halves their risk of further pregnancy loss, a new study has found.
Australian researchers followed 220 couples who had had at least three miscarriages.
They found that screening the women for thrombophilia, a tendency to develop blood clots, and giving them prophylactic anti-thrombotic therapy halved their future chances of losing a pregnancy.
Professor of obstetrics and gynaecology at the University of Adelaide, Gus Dekker, says the women were screened for thrombophilia, insulin resistance and elevated homocysteine levels. 
"We found that if you do nothing, these women can expect a 30% to 35% chance of a further miscarriage," he says. 
"But if you treat them, the pregnancy loss rate is halved to 15%. There is light on the horizon for women who have recurrent miscarriages as proper analysis and treatment can increase the chance of having a healthy baby from 70% to 85%."
Anti-thrombotic therapy includes aspirin plus low molecular weight heparin. Treatment for elevated levels of homocysteine, which is another risk factor for clotting, is vitamins including folate and vitamin B12.
Professor Dekker presented findings at the recent Human Reproductive Health Through the Ages conference in Adelaide.
He says the data, literature and the researchers' own experience indicate that screening identified major risk factors in 50-60% of recurrent miscarriage cases.
"We can modify most of these risk factors such as insulin resistance and thrombophilias," he says.
He advises these women should be referred to an obstetrician with a special interest in the area.
Dekker says women who had had three miscarriages or women in their mid-30s who had had two, and did not have a condition known as a blighted ovum, could be referred.
Women with a personal or family history of thrombophilia could also be referred, as could women with a history of pre-eclampsia or unexplained preterm birth.
"Most thrombophilias affect the early development of the placental circulation so treatment to prevent thrombosis and possibly provide an anti-inflammatory effect, can stop the process," he says.

The same mathematical used to schedule trains are being used to prioritise the allocation of scarce conservation dollars
Scientists are using mathematical formulae normally used by economists and engineers to work out which of the world's biodiversity hotspots to save first.
Ecologist and mathematician Professor Hugh Possingham and team at the University of Queensland report their research in today's issue of the journal Nature.
Since the 1980s, global conservation agencies have identified particular areas around the world that are rich in species but under threat from habitat destruction.
But there are many such 'biodiversity hotspots' that need attention, and a limited budget to save them.
Until now, says Possingham, there hasn't been a rational way of prioritising where to act first.
"Do you act in them all simultaneously? Do you try and pick out three of them? And how long do you spend acting in one before you move to another?"
Possingham's team has applied mathematical tools regularly used by economists and engineers to find the optimum way to answer these questions.
"[The tools] run our entire economy, they schedule all the airlines, they schedule all the trains," says Possingham.
"Any transportation organisation is using optimisation methods to work out which trucks should go where at what times."
He says in this case the tools are applied to saving as many species as possible.
"In a sense it's not that much more than third year or fourth year applied maths or economics at university," says Possingham.
"But the kind of people working in these [conservation] fields often don't have these skills so they often thought about formulating the problem properly."
Prioritising hotspots
Possingham's team has developed a method of prioritising hotspots that take into consideration a range of features apart from how many species an area has.
High priority is given to areas where habitat is fast disappearing, little of the area has already disappeared, and where the cost of conserving habitat is low.
Another factor that influences the priority given to an area is how likely it is to conserved in the future.
"If you are going to invest in a place where you're not sure that you'll get the investment, you're not sure the national park will stay a national park, you'd want to get a lot more benefit out of that investment," says Possingham.
"You're willing to pay higher prices for places that are secure."
He says this is exactly the same as trade-offs made in the share market, where you expect a higher outcome for high-risk investments and a lower outcome for low-risk ones.
The team is currently working with Conservation International and The Nature Conservancy to help establish conservation priorities across the globe.
So far Possingham and team have tested their method on five areas in South East Asia and found that Sulawesi would be a higher priority than Sumatra, Borneo, Java and Malaysia.

Supermarket databases could be vulnerable to virus attacks, causing chaos at the checkout
Cheap radio chips that are replacing the ubiquitous barcode are a threat to privacy and susceptible to computer viruses, scientists say.
And a deliberate virus attack could potentially cause chaos at airports and supermarkets.
Researchers at Amsterdam's Free University created a radio frequency identity (RFID) chip infected with a virus to prove that RFID systems are vulnerable despite their extremely low memory capacity. 
The problem is that an infected RFID tag, which is read wirelessly when it passes through a scanning gate, can upset the database that processes the information on the chip, say the study authors.
"Everyone working on RFID technology has tacitly assumed that the mere act of scanning an RFID tag cannot modify back-end software and certainly not in a malicious way. Unfortunately, they are wrong," they say.
"An RFID tag can be infected with a virus and this virus can infect the back-end database used by the RFID software. From there it can be easily spread to other RFID tags."
As a result, they say, it is possible that criminals or militants could use an infected RFID tag to upset airline baggage handling systems with potentially devastating consequences.
The same technology could also be used to wreak havoc with the databases used by supermarkets. 
"This is intended as a wake-up call. We ask the RFID industry to design systems that are secure," says author Professor Andrew Tanenbaum.
With RFID, anything from shampoo bottles to marathon runners can be tracked using radio tags. 
Civil liberty groups say RFID could lead to an unacceptable invasion of privacy and argue that airline ticket information could be used by law enforcement agencies and divorce lawyers. 
Industries in which tracking goods is crucial such as pharmaceuticals, governments, logistics, airlines and manufacturing already use RFID technology.

The concave-eared torrent frog needs to 'shout' to be heard over the sound of rushing water. It uses a form of communication before now only seen in mammals
A rare frog uses ultrasound to communicate, a clever tool that helps it overcome the noise of the waterfalls it lives in, researchers say.
The concave-eared torrent frog (Amolops tormotus) is the first non-mammalian species known to use the ultra-high frequencies that humans cannot hear.
It joins bats, dolphins and whales, and a small number of rodents, in the elite club of creatures that can communicate this way. 
A US and Chinese team reports its find today in the journal Nature. 
Professor Albert Feng of the University of Illinois and team found that male frogs of the species make high-pitched melodic bird-like calls.
The calls sometimes exceeded their recorder's maximum range of 128 kilohertz, more than six times the limit of human hearing. 
The frogs inhabit Huangshan Hot Springs, a popular mountainous area west of Shanghai, where there are loud waterfalls and streams. 
The high frequencies provide a channel of communication that cannot be disrupted by the lower-frequency rumble of the water, says Feng. 
"Nature has a way of evolving mechanisms to facilitate communication in very adverse situations," he says. 
"One of the ways is to shift the frequencies beyond the spectrum of the background noise. Mammals such as bats, whales and dolphins do this, and use ultrasound for their sonar system and communication. Frogs were never taken into consideration for being able to do this." 
The discovery also answers a puzzle as to why the frogs do not have external eardrums. 
"Thin eardrums are needed for detection of ultrasound," says Feng. "Recessed ears shorten the path between the eardrums and the ear, enabling the transmission of ultrasound to the ear." 
Ultrasounds are high-pitched sounds with a frequency of more than 20 kilohertz, much higher than the frequency most birds, reptiles and amphibians can hear.

Long, single strands of DNA, plus strengthening shorter strands, were used to make this image
A nanotechnologist has created the world's smallest and most plentiful smiley, a tiny face measuring a few billionths of a metre across assembled from strands of DNA.
Dr Paul Rothemund at the California Institute of Technology can make 50 billion smileys, each a thousand times smaller than the diameter of a human hair, with his technique.
DNA has long been known for its versatility as a microscopic building block. 
The molecule can be 'cut' using enzymes and reassembled using matching rungs in its double-helix structure.
This theoretically opens the way to making DNA quantum computers and nano-level devices including injectable robots that can monitor the body's tissues for good health. 
But, until now, nano-assembly has been a complex atom-by-atom procedure that is also costly, because it is carried out in a vacuum or at extremely coldly temperatures. 
Rothemund, writing in today's issue of the journal Nature, describes a far simpler and much cheaper process in which long, single strands of DNA can be folded back and forth to form a basic scaffold. 
The basic structure is then supplemented by around 200 shorter strands, which both strengthen it and act rather like pixels in a computer or TV image, thus providing a shape that can bear a complex pattern. 
In a potent demonstration of his so-called DNA origami technique, Rothemund has created half a dozen shapes, including a five-pointed star, a snowflake, a picture of the double helix and a map of the Americas in which one nanometre represents 120 kilometres. 
Rothemund has been working on flat, two-dimensional shapes but says that 3D structures in DNA should be quite feasible with this technique.
One application would be a nano-scale 'cage' in which pharmaceutical researchers, working on novel drugs, could sequester enzymes until they were ready for use in turning other proteins on and off.

Whether your brain triggers you to act violently or not is determined by a complex mix of genes and environment
People who are genetically predisposed to violence have a different brain structure to others, a new study suggests.
Dr Daniel Weinberger, of the US National Institute of Mental Health and team report their findings in today's issue of the Proceedings of the National Academy of Science.
"[Our] data identify neural mechanisms associated with one specific gene epidemiologically associated with risk for violent and impulsive behaviour," they say.
The gene, which is carried on the X chromosome, produces an enzyme that mops up stress hormones in the brain.
Some researchers suggest that a certain form of this monoamine oxidase A (MAOA) gene is linked to violent behaviour.
According to Australian neurogeneticist Professor Peter Schofield the most profound demonstration of the link was a study more than 10 years ago of a rare family in the Netherlands that had a catastrophic mutation in that gene.
"All the males in that family with that mutation were arsonists and rapists," says Schofield, who heads the Prince of Wales Medical Research Institute in Sydney.
In addition, he says, animal studies have shown that mice without an MAOA gene have aggressive tendencies.
These drastic exceptions aside, the MAOA gene occurs naturally in all of us in one of two forms, one that expresses the enzyme at very low levels, and one that expresses it at high levels.
Some researchers think that there might be a correlation between the low-expressing form and violent behaviour.
But a study done a few years ago, of 1000 men born in the New Zealand city of Dunedin, found no direct link between the gene form and violent behaviour.
What they did find was an indirect link: those men who had the low-expressing version of the MAOA gene and had been abused as children were far more prone to violent behaviour.
Now, Weinberger and team have tried to find out more about how this complex interaction of genes and environment works.
The study
Weinberger and team studied the genes and brains of 142 healthy men and women, who had no history of violence.
The researchers showed the study participants pictures of angry and fearful faces and monitored the structure and function of their brains using magnetic resonance imaging.
They found those with the low-expressing version of MAOA were more impulsive.
Parts of their brain associated with emotion differed in size and activity to those with the high-expressing version.
The study also found that activity of those parts of the brain in males with low-expression MAOA differed more greatly than their female counterparts.
Weinberger and team say their work sheds light on the neural mechanisms involved in genetic predisposition to violence and it could help in finding ways to combat violence using biological approaches.
But they emphasise the genetic contribution to violence is small.
Nature and nature
Schofield welcomes the new research saying it builds on the previous Dunedin study by exploring how genes and environment can interact.
"It's neither nurture nor nature, it is a complex mixture of both," he says.
Schofield says the main weakness of the study is that it studied normal people and extrapolated what this might mean for violent people.
He says the obvious next step would be to see if the results held true for a group of people who had a history of violent crime.
But he says, if the emotional seat of the brain is involved, it suggests that cognitive behavioural therapy may be a useful tool to counter violent behaviour.
Neuroscientist Professor Lesley Rogers of the University of New England in Armidale also welcomes the study.
"This expression of MAOA form is really important in terms of how a brain will deal with a social situation, whether [a person will] go over the top or not," says Rogers, who has written extensively on the relationship between genes and environment.

The deep sea is rich in unusual creatures that biotech companies are keen to exploit. This hydrothermal vent, for example, is home to riftia tubeworms mussels and scavenging crabs
Biotechnology companies are profiting from living resources found in the deep ocean without laws to ensure their actions are sustainable and fair, says an Australian environmental lawyer.
Dr David Leary of Macquarie University in Sydney says his research has revealed there are six companies selling products derived from the deep ocean and another eight developing them.
"They are the main players in the biotech industry; they're North American and European companies," he says.
Leary says while international laws cover mining in the deep sea, no-one is mining there yet.
"[But] we have bioprospecting and exploitation of the genetic resources of the deep sea, beyond national jurisidiction," says Leary, who describes the deep sea as one of the world's last remaining commons.
"People are making a profit now," he says.
Leary says national scientific research organisations in Japan, France, US, Russia, Australia, Canada and New Zealand are also involved in bioprospecting in the deep sea.
He says biotech companies rely on these public organisations for access to deep-sea resources because the companies don't own the specialised equipment needed to explore the deep sea.
"What is difficult, because of commercial confidentiality, is getting a handle on how close industry is to government science," says Leary.
Cosmetics, drugs, industrial enzymes
He says there are 37 patents, filed in Europe and the US, on derivatives of deep-sea organisms.
There are cosmetics on sale derived from microbes that survive in extreme environments found deep below the surface of the ocean, says Leary, and enzymes from the same source are used in industrial processes and research.
A French government agency is currently testing a bone-healing drug also made from these extremophiles, he says.
And there is research into developing artificial blood from the haemoglobin of tubeworms found around deep-sea hydrothermal vents.
There is also research on chemicals from corals on deep-sea mounts, says Leary.

Part of the Maldives island chain from space: Nearly 100 people were killed here following the 2004 tsunami, and over 20,000 were displaced
Some of the low-lying islands of the Maldives grew taller as a result of the deadly 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami, a new study has found.
Dr Paul Kench, of the University of Auckland in New Zealand, and team report their findings in the March issue of the journal Geology. 
Despite the disastrous effects of the tsunami on humans and man-made structures in the Maldives, less than 5% of the land area was significantly changed by the tsunami, say the researchers. 
A before-and-after study of 13 small islands suggests that the low-lying coral atolls are tougher than they look. 
"We looked for any evidence of change," says Kench. 
He and his team had already surveyed 13 small islands in the Maldives, before the tsunami in 2002 and 2003, so they were in a perfect position to assess the effects of the tsunami. 
The first thing Kench and his team discovered was that the tsunami was not nearly as high at the Maldives as along other coasts. That's because there is no continental shelf along which the waves could build up and break. 
Instead, says Kench, the highest in the series of waves from the Great Sumatra-Andaman Earthquake were only about 3 metres, which washed over the 1.5 to 2 metre-high islands and then kept racing toward Africa. 
"There weren't these thundering walls of water crashing across the islands," says Kench. "Nevertheless, they all went underwater." 
The islands were also spared any backwash, which doubled the scouring effect elsewhere, Kench says. 
On the contrary, the tsunami scoured only the eastern sides of the islands, where it struck and carried the coral beach sand over the islands. As much as 30 centimetres of sand was deposited on top of one island, with the others gaining 5 to 10 centimetres. 
"It just added freeboard," says Kench. 
The bottom line, he says, is that geologically speaking, the tsunami was anything but a destructive event for the island landmass of the Maldives. 
"I think it's a quite useful paper," says marine geologist Dr Chris Perry at Manchester Metropolitan University in the UK. "The [island] response is fairly minimal." 
But it's not clear whether it offers any clues to how the Maldives or other atolls will withstand rapid rises in sea level due to the melting of glaciers by global warming. 
"We don't know the rates of [reef] growth," says Perry. 
And there's also the fact that many atolls are now suffering from coral bleaching, which stops growth altogether.

Just like her screen depiction by movie star Elizabeth Taylor, Cleopatra knew all about power hair
Egyptian queen Cleopatra used her hairstyles to enhance her power and fame, says a professor of art history and classics.
Statues, coins and other existing depictions of the queen suggest Cleopatra (69-30 BC) wore at least three hairstyles, Professor Diana Kleiner of Yale University says in a new book.
The first, a "travelling" do that mimicked the hair of a Macedonian Greek queen, involved sectioning the hair into curls, which were then often pulled away from the face and gathered into a bun at the back.
The next was a coiffure resembling a melon, and the third was the regal Cleopatra in her royal Egyptian headdress, complete with a rearing cobra made of precious metal.
Cleopatra did not invent any of these styles, but she used them to her advantage, Kleiner indicates in her book Cleopatra and Rome.
Ptolemaic trendsetters
From the time of Egyptian King Ptolemy I, the Ptolemaic queens wore the 'melon hairstyle' with its segmented sections resembling a melon or gourd," Kleiner says.
"When Cleopatra followed suit, she was more traditionalist than trendsetter.
"These same Ptolemaic queens were also depicted in art with the usual Egyptian wigged headdress that had its origins in Pharaonic times.
"Cleopatra did as well, so again she followed tradition and did not innovate when it came to hair."
"But," Kleiner says, "Cleopatra appears to have worn different coiffures in different circumstances, playing to her audience, so to speak, in life and in art."
Kleiner says when the queen was in her homeland, her likely objective was to look like a traditional Egyptian ruler, although she was in fact Greek, and to legitimise the Ptolemaic dynasty by linking it to the time of the Pharaohs.
A group of Egyptian statues recently has been linked to Cleopatra, although the identification can't be proved since there are no accompanying inscriptions.
"These show her with the customary Egyptian wig and the triple uraeus (rearing cobra)," she says.
"This Egyptian coiffure is the one we most often associate with Cleopatra today. Think Elizabeth Taylor!" 
Divine ornaments
The uraeus was associated with a cobra goddess Wadjyt, the sun god Ra and the goddess Hathor, so wearing it signified that the individual had taken on the attributes of a divinity.
Cleopatra also probably often wore the melon hairstyle in Egypt, where she had many slaves to attend to her appearance, including some that were responsible for maintaining the royal wigs.
The Egyptian queen extensively travelled, and did so in style. Not unlike film depictions, Cleopatra would arrive via elegant barge with her attendants catering to her every need.
In Rome, Kleiner believes Cleopatra wore her "Hellenistic travelling coiffure" in places where it would be seen and "gossiped about at cocktail parties."
At about the same time, Kleiner notes the melon hairstyle turns up in Roman portraiture, which suggests Roman women admired Cleopatra and attempted to copy her.
Nodus operandi
Roman leaders Octavian, Antony and Julius Caesar seduced the Egyptian queen.
Kleiner suggests that Octavia, Antony's wife, invented a hairstyle called "the nodus" to compete with Cleopatra.
 The nodus featured a roll over the forehead that Kleiner says may have mimicked Cleopatra's well-known rearing cobra.
The nodus was the height of Roman fashion in the 30s BC, just before Cleopatra's death by suicide at the age of 39.
Karl Galinsky, distinguished professor of classics at the University of Texas at Austin, says he agrees that Cleopatra wore different looks, including calculated hairstyles.
He says they were designed to convey a message and Cleopatra may have had different hair days in different countries.

Drug research company Parexel carried out a drug trial that went horribly wrong. Could it happen in Australia
As doctors scramble to understand what caused the catastrophic reaction to a drug given in a UK trial, researchers say the possibility of something similar happening in Australia can't be ruled out.
British experts are baffled about why six healthy volunteers suffered a massive reaction shortly after being given the antibody drug TGN1412 last week.
Two remain critically ill and four are seriously ill. Two others who received a placebo escaped harm.
It's believed differences between a cell-signalling protein in humans and animals may explain the unexpectedly severe reaction in the previously healthy young men, who were paid for their participation.
They were the first humans to receive the drug, designed to treat leukaemia and chronic inflammation disorders. 
Australian clinical trials experts say we should learn a lesson from the UK experience and consider more sophisticated ways of trialling potentially dangerous new drugs.
Dr Chris Karapetis, a principal investigator in several clinical trials in oncology at Flinders Medical Centre in Adelaide, says Australian trials are subject to rigorous ethical and scientific scrutiny but risks remain.
"Obviously you cannot rule out the possibility of there being an adverse reaction in a trial of this nature," he says.
"One of the things that is crucial is that all potential risks are explained to patients, and when it's a new drug, the risk that there could be a side effect that develops that's unknown."
What went wrong?
Doctors say they have never before seen a reaction such as occurred during the trial of TGN1412, made by privately owned German company TeGenero AG.
US drug research company Parexel was running the trial on behalf of TeGenero.
Dr Thomas Hanke, chief scientific officer at TeGenero, says previous tests on animals hadn't produced drug related adverse events or drug-related deaths.
TGN1412 belongs to a class of drugs known as monoclonal antibodies, which specifically bind to target molecules. TGN1412 targets an immune system protein called CD28.
CD28 is a protein on the surface of some white blood cells that plays a part in activating them for an immune response.
Hanke says TGN1412 was designed to activate its target protein - rather than blocking it as many antibody drugs do.
Dr David Glover, a UK drug industry consultant with extensive experience of antibody treatments, says the protein the drug targets may not be the same in all species. 
"I suspect the antibody was designed to work against human CD28 and because it was designed to work best in humans its performance in different animals may fall short of what you might have expected in humans," he says. 
"That is why the animal testing may have falsely provided reassuring results. It could be one of the explanations."
What can Australia do?
Australian clinical pharmacologist Professor Paul Rolan of the University of Adelaide has introduced 70 new molecules into humans during 20 years of clinical trials.
He says TGN1412 is different to many other drugs because it has a very specific target in the body.
"Such 'magic bullet' drugs can be very specific to humans and may not cause adverse reactions in animals used in preclinical trials," he says.
Rolan says the way we do trials may need to become more sophisticated as we search for more specific and powerful drugs.
Rather than testing these sorts of drugs in animals we may have to use animals that have been genetically modified to make them more like humans.
He believes Australia has the expertise to do these sort of trials.
The Garvan Institute of Medical Research in Sydney says it is already using these methods.
In a statement, the Garvan says Australian clinical trials have "a fantastic record".
"It is absolutely vital that both volunteers and patients continue to agree to participate in clinical trials for new medicines," it says.
What's the future for antibody treatments?
Glover says no one should lose sight of the benefits of antibody drugs.
He says the focus shouldn't be on antibody treatments in general, or stopping clinical trials. 
The breast cancer drug Herceptin, made by the Swiss pharmaceutical Roche, is an antibody treatment.
It attaches itself to the HER2 receptor on the cancer cells and blocks them from receiving growth signal. 
Eighteen antibody products have been approved for sale and their combined worldwide sales reached $US14 billion (A$19.3 billion) last year.
But Glover says trials of drugs targeting the protein CD28 should be reviewed.
"Should we stop doing trials that are directed against the target CD28? I think the answer is yes, until more is known about what it going on," he says. 
The UK's Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency is conducting an enquiry into what went wrong and results are expected in the coming weeks.

Will bird flu vaccines be out of date by the time they are ready for use?
The H5N1 bird flu in humans has evolved into two separate strains, a development that will complicate the search for a vaccine and the prevention of a pandemic, US researchers report. 
The genetic diversification of the pool of H5N1 avian influenza viruses with the potential to cause a human influenza pandemic heightens the need for careful surveillance, researchers said at the International Conference on Emerging Infectious Diseases in Atlanta. 
"Back in 2003 we only had one genetically distinct population of H5N1 with the potential to cause a human pandemic. Now we have two," says Dr Rebecca Garten of the US Centers for Disease Control (CDC), who helped to conduct the study. 
One of the two strains, or clades, made people sick in Vietnam, Cambodia and Thailand in 2003 and 2004 and the second, a cousin of the first, caused the disease in people in Indonesia in 2005. 
Two clades may share the same ancestor but are genetically distinct, as are different clades, or strains, of HIV, the team from the CDC found. 
"This does complicate vaccine development. But we are moving very swiftly to develop vaccines against this new group of viruses," says Dr Nancy Cox, chief of the CDC's influenza branch.
The H5N1 strain of bird flu has spread across Europe, Africa and parts of Asia and killed nearly 100 people worldwide and infected about 180 since it reemerged in 2003. 
Although it is difficult to catch bird flu, people can become infected if they come into close contact with infected birds.
Scientists fear the virus could mutate into a form that could pass easily between humans, triggering a pandemic in which millions could die.
Transmission from human to human?
All influenza viruses mutate easily, and H5N1 appears to be no exception. 
But Cox says the evolution of a second clade does not move the virus closer to human-to-human transmission. 
"Like the group one or clade one viruses, the group two or clade two viruses are not easily transmitted from person to person," she says.
"It really doesn't take us closer to a pandemic. It simply makes preparing for the pandemic a bit more difficult." 
The US Department of Health and Human Services has already recognised the two strains and approved the development of a second H5N1 vaccine based on the second clade. 
Several companies are working on H5N1 vaccines experimentally, although current formulations are not expected to protect very well, if at all, against any pandemic strain. 
A vaccine against a pandemic flu strain would have to be formulated using the actual virus passing from person to person.
Partial protection
Researchers say while vaccines were needed against different strains of the virus, a vaccination against one clade could provide partial protection against another. 
"We would expect the priming [of a patient] with a clade one [vaccine] could potentially reduce the severity of disease," Cox says.
For their study, Garten and colleagues analysed more than 300 H5N1 virus samples taken from both infected birds and people from 2003 through the northern hemisphere summer of 2005.
Garten says the bird flu strains being detected in Europe are generally clade two strains.

The northern Queensland town of Innisfail copped the full force of Cyclone Larry
When tropical Cyclone Larry lashed the Queensland coast at the weekend it raised questions of whether it was a sign of a changing climate.
Could it be the harbinger of a new drought-busting La Ni&ntilde;a weather cycle? Could it be a product of human-induced climate change?
Or is it just too soon to tell?
Larry slammed into Australia's northeast coast on Sunday morning, local time.
Initial reports said it was the most powerful cyclone to hit the continent in decades, moving at unusual speed and packing winds of up to 290 kilometres an hour.
Dr Geoff Love, director of meteorology at the Bureau of Meteorology (BOM) says Larry was on a par with Cyclone Tracey, which devastated Darwin in 1974.
The BOM categorises cyclones from 1 to 5, with 5 being the most severe.
Love says Larry was probably "high category 4, probably not quite 5" and neither unusual nor unexpected.
"Larry was no different from any other tropical cyclone," he says.
But Love says more cyclones hit tropical Queensland in La Ni&ntilde;a conditions, a possible sign that Australia is headed for a change after emerging from El Ni&ntilde;o three years ago.
"With an El Ni&ntilde;o, cyclones tend to form out closer to the dateline and probably occur before they reach Australian longitude, in La Ni&ntilde;a they form closer to the Australian coast," he says 
Pacific oscillations
Records going back to the 1880's show a clear La Ni&ntilde;a-El Ni&ntilde;o cycle, Love says.
The La Ni&ntilde;a  and El Ni&ntilde;o effects are two extremes of an atmospheric and oceanic oscillation in the Pacific Ocean.
They have a direct and significant impact on climate in some parts of the world, including Australia.
El Ni&ntilde;o occurs when the surface of the ocean warms and leads to drier conditions in Australia, which mean more droughts and fires.
Cooling surface waters cause La Ni&ntilde;a , which causes wetter conditions and more flooding.
The two phases switch every few years. But they don't always neatly alternate, making it difficult to make predictions.
Love says there have been about 20 El Ni&ntilde;os and 20 La Ni&ntilde;a s in the past 120 years. 
This amounts to about 20 six year cycles made up of roughly four neutral years and two years of El Ni&ntilde;o or La Ni&ntilde;a, or one year of each.
Australia is currently in what Love calls a "neutral, weak, wishy-washy" period, although there are signs we're trending towards La Ni&ntilde;a.
"I think we have been sort of just on the borderline," he says.
"The Americans have a lower threshold, they're calling it a weak La Ni&ntilde;a. We're saying it's just short of being a La Ni&ntilde;a."
 What about climate change?
The latest global tropical cyclone season, which is just coming to an end, has been described as one of the worst in recent times, making it tempting to view Cyclone Larry as a product of human-related climate change.
Grant Beard, a climatologist with the BOM's National Climate Centre, says the recent increase in intense tropical cyclones may be linked to warming. 
"Looking at the globe it seems that the number of intense tropical cyclones has increased over the last 30 years," he says.
"That's linked probably to the rising ocean temperatures and this is one sign of the enhanced greenhouse effect."
Dr Kevin Walsh is associate professor of meteorology at the University of Melbourne and previously worked on the effect of climate change on tropical cyclones at CSIRO.
He says climate change is likely to have some impact on cyclones, although this is yet to be proved.
"All the projections say sea temperatures are warming and there are well known theoretical relationships between the warmth of the ocean and tropical cyclones," he says.
"But it's controversial whether those effects have yet been detected."
Love says only time will tell whether Larry is the product of climate change.
"The jury's out," he says. "Any one event by itself doesn't prove or disprove anything."

The artificial muscles work just like real ones, converting chemical energy into mechanical energy
Artificial muscles have been made in the lab that are 100 times stronger than the real thing, a recent study shows.
Two kinds of these super-strong artificial muscles can convert chemical energy into mechanical energy, making them function like natural muscles, the scientists say.
Dr Von Howard Ebron and colleagues, from the NanoTech Institute at University of Texas at Dallas report their progress in the current issue of the journal Science.
The artificial muscles could help usher in an entirely new breed of so-called fuel-cell muscles, the scientists say.
These receive chemical fuel, such as hydrogen or methanol, through a circulatory system, convert it to mechanical energy, and store any unused energy for later. 
Such muscles could be used to move robots and robotic exoskeletons, or as part of structures on air and marine vehicles that morph into different shapes. 
"In the future, the humanoid robot sitting next to you at the bar may be drinking alcohol in order to work the next day," says Professor Ray Baughman, the research team leader and director of the NanoTech Institute. 
One of the most successful kinds of artificial muscle consists of a stretchy material, which does not conduct electricity, sandwiched between two layers of material that do. 
When an electric current is applied, the plus and minus charges accumulate on opposite layers of the sandwich. They are attracted to each other and squeeze down on the rubbery centre, giving the muscle its flexing ability. 
A cord or batteries normally supply the power. But Baughman's team created two kinds of artificial muscles charged by a chemical reaction, eliminating the need for range-limiting power cords and bulky, short-lived batteries. 
"The approach is not without challenges, but it could transform the way complex mechanical systems are built," writes Dr John Madden, an assistant professor at the University of British Columbia, in the same issue of the journal.
Carbon nanotubes
In the first approach, the scientists coated a sheet made of pure carbon nanotubes with platinum nanoparticles. They immersed the sheet into a solution of sulfuric acid. 
A chemical reaction accelerated by the platinum catalyst converts each molecule of the hydrogen fuel to two protons and two electrons. 
Repulsion between the electrons causes the nanotubes to expand. 
In the second approach, the scientists used a special filament known as shape-memory wire, which can be trained to contract into a particular shape when heat is applied to it. 
The team coated a straight memory wire with platinum nanoparticles and then exposed it to vapours from methanol mixed with air. 
A chemical reaction occurred between the the alcohol and the oxygen in the air, which produced heat and caused the wire to contract. 
Both types of muscles could be used in autonomous robots or as robotic armor worn by soldiers or astronauts to give them super-human strength, the scientists say. 
Baughman imagines that the technology could eventually use sugars in the human body as fuel and enzymes instead of platinum to work one important artificial muscle: a heart.

Female eastern whipbirds sing with a regional accent, which biologists say may be related to coordinating reproductive activities
Female whipbirds in Australia sing the same basic songs, but with regional accents, researchers show.
Female birds in general rarely sing, so this latest find itself is unusual.
But the find is doubly noteworthy because the scientists observed that the males of this species, Psophodes olivaceus, sing with no accent whatsoever. 
"It is so intriguing to see both of these opposite patterns occurring within the same species," says lead researcher Daniel Mennill, a professor of behavioural ecology at the University of Windsor in Canada. 
"You wouldn't be shocked to visit one town and hear people speak with a twang, and then visit another town and hear a drawl," he says.
"But can you imagine if, in your travels, you found that females sounded different in each town, but males had the same brogue? These whipbirds demonstrate such a pattern." 
Mennill and his colleague Amy Rogers, from the University of Melbourne, measured eastern whipbird recordings from 16 different populations along the east coast of Australia.
For each of the 112 birds they recorded, they measured the song's number of syllables, the length of the first syllable, the highest and lowest frequency of the last syllable, the time between these frequency extremes and other characteristics. 
The vast majority of female recordings showed variations on each of these criteria, but male songs were all virtually identical. 
The researchers publish their findings in a recent issue of the Journal of Avian Biology and post samples of the birdsong on their website.
Cracking the whip
In the wild, the males and females sing duets. Males initiate the duet with a long whistle and an ear-splitting 'whip crack'. Females then respond with a sharp 'chew chew'. 
"In my opinion, the 'whip crack' sound might be the most extraordinary note produced by any beast in the animal kingdom," Mennill says.
"It involves a pure tone that ascends or descends extremely rapidly across a very broad frequency spectrum. It is possible that this note is difficult to perform, and that females may favour males who are capable of executing this difficult note effectively." 
While males must sing their hearts out for females, both males and females engage in their own same-sex singing contests.
For these contests, usually each bird will perch itself near its territory boundaries. Birds then sing back and forth, trying to match the song sung by the opponent. Often the songs wind up overlapping.
Interesting findings
Peter Slater, a professor of natural history at the University of St Andrews in Scotland, agrees with the findings.
"The real surprise here is the stereotypy [repetitive sameness] of the males. In some other birds, females appear to choose mates on the basis that they perform a song that is quite hard to produce. I like the idea that the whip crack may be such a phenomenon and this might explain its very unusual stereotypy," Slater says.
In terms of accents, he says that geographical variations, or dialects, are found in other songbirds, whales, seals and primates. 
Mennill suggests that females may benefit by sharing songs that are similar to those of nearby females. While these benefits remain unclear, it is possible that the singing helps to somehow coordinate reproductive activities. 
Male eastern whipbirds perhaps might have evolved accents too, if it were not for their impressive 'whip crack' song with its stunning finale.

The technique may one-day be used to search earthquake rubble for survivors, the researchers say
A laser-like beam of light shone at a unique solid makes the material appear to disappear, according to a new study. 
The effect, reported in a recent issue of the journal Nature Materials, occurs at infrared light wavelengths, so it can't be seen with the human eye. 
"[But] if it worked in the visible light with molecules that make up your hand, when the laser hit your hand, your hand would go transparent," says team member Professor Chris Phillips, a physicist at Imperial College London.
"And then if you turned the laser up a little more, the scene you'd see through your hand would become brighter," as the effect amplifies light in the beam, he says. 
Phillips and his colleagues from the University of Neuch&acirc;tel, Switzerland, think the method could one day work in visible light and lead to new technologies that help see through rubble to search for victims at a disaster site or observe internal body parts obscured by bone. 
The scientists accomplished their feat with materials used to make semiconductor chips.
Normally, electrons that make up atoms in these materials interact with light beams in a benign way. 
But Phillips and his team re-engineered the material to contain artificial atoms, specially patterned crystals a few billionths of a metre long. 
Because the atoms are artificial, the scientists could adjust the activity of the electrons, which have wavelike characteristics. 
When the light beam was shone onto the material, it influenced the wavelike patterns of the electrons inside the artificial atoms so that they cancelled each other out and created a new, transparent material that was half matter and half light. 
The scientists went on to amplify the light beam, even though 80% of the artificial atoms stayed in a state of so-called low excitation. 
This contradicts a theory posed by Albert Einstein that says in order to amplify the light in a laser beam, the majority of the atoms must be in state of high excitation. 
"They have shown this can now be implemented in a solid-state medium, which could be very important for more practical applications," says Lene Vestergaard Hau, professor of applied physics at Harvard University. 
In the future, the researchers aim to become better at controlling and amplifying the light beam so that they may not need a specially patterned structure to make the see-through effect work.

The 2002 launch: scramjet technology could one-day be used in planes that fly from London to Sydney in two hours, say the researchers
A new scramjet engine, shaped like a bullet, will be tested in the Australian desert tomorrow by an international team of scientists that hopes it will be more efficient than previous designs.
Australian researchers from the HyShot Flight Program at the University of Queensland, will test the new scramjet, developed by a British defence technology company, QinetiQ.
The experiment is to be carried out on Australian defence property at Woomera in South Australia this Friday local time and is also sponsored by the US Air Force and the Canadian Air Force.
A scramjet (supersonic combustion ramjet) operates at speeds greater than Mach 5, or five times the speed of sound. 
It is able to deliver a sustained thrust at hypersonic speed by rapidly sucking in oxygen and burning hydrogen fuel, releasing steam as exhaust.
The HyShot team carried out the world's first successful scramjet test flight at Woomera in 2002 with a University of Queensland-designed engine.
That original design had a two-dimensional wedge-shaped air intake and a rectangular-shaped combustor, says Associate Professor Michael Smart, who designs scramjets with the HyShot team.
He says the new scramjet has a three-dimensional bullet-shaped intake with an elliptical shaped combustor.
And the shape of the engine affects how efficiently air is scooped up.
"It's a ram effect and there are lots of different shapes you can use to try to push that air down through the engine, so we're just trying out different ones," he told ABC Science Online by phone from the Woomera test site.

The H5N1 bird flu virus doesn't lock onto the right receptors in humans, says new research
Virologists say they understand why bird flu in its present form does not spread among humans.
The finding suggests the world may have a precious breathing space to prepare for any flu pandemic. 
The reason lies in minute differences to cells located in the top and bottom of the airways, the team reports in today's issue of the journal Nature.
To penetrate a cell, the spikes that stud an influenza virus have to be able to bind to the cellular surface. 
The virus spike is like a key and the cell's docking point, called a receptor, is like a lock. They both have to be the right shape for the connection to happen. 
Scientists in the US and Japan, led by Professor Yoshihiro Kawaoka of the University of Wisconsin at Madison, found that avian influenza viruses and human influenza viruses home in on slightly different receptors.
The receptor preferred by human flu is more prevalent in cells in the mucous lining of the nose and sinus as well as the throat, trachea and bronchi.
But the receptor preferred by bird flu tends to be found among cells deep in the lung, in ball-like structures called the alveoli. 
It means H5N1 is likely to hole up in a part of the airways that does not cause coughing and sneezing, the means by which the flu virus is classically transmitted among humans.
Birds infecting humans
Bird flu is lethal to poultry and dangerous for humans in close proximity to infected fowl. It has claimed more than 100 lives, according to the World Health Organization. 
But, apart from a few anecdotal cases, the mortality has occurred exclusively by direct transmission from birds to humans and not among humans themselves. To acquire that contagiousness would open the way to a pandemic. 
"Our findings indicate that H5N1 virus can replicate efficiently only in cells in the lower region of the respiratory tract, where the avian virus receptor is prevalent," the paper says. 
"This restriction may contribute to the inefficient human-to-human transmission of H5N1 viruses seen to date." 
So what would turn H5N1 into a pandemic virus?
First and foremost, it would need mutations in the spike, the haemagglutinin molecule, to enable the virus to bind to cells in the upper respiratory tract. 
This would enable the virus to spread via coughs and sneezes and nasal mucus, which are caused by irritation to the upper airways. 
To boost its pandemic potential, the virus also needs changes in its PB2 gene, which controls an enzyme essential for efficient reproduction. 
"Nobody knows whether the virus will evolve into a pandemic strain, but flu viruses constantly change," says Kawaoka. 
"Certainly, multiple mutations need to be accumulated for the H5N1 to become a pandemic strain." 
The findings suggest scientists and public health agencies may have more time to prepare for an eventual pandemic of avian influenza, the team believes. 
Kawaoka's team exposed various tissues from the human respiratory tract to a range of viruses in lab dishes. 
The viruses were the human strains H1N1 and H3N2 and the bird strains H3N2 and H4N6. In addition, there were two H5N1 samples, one taken from a human victim in Hong Kong and one from a duck in Vietnam. 
Flu viruses reproduce sloppily, which induces slight changes in their genetic code. This movement is called antigenic drift, and explains why seasonal flu viruses keep changing and new updated vaccines are needed. 
But they can also make big changes, called antigenic shift, in which new genes are brought in, thus creating a new pathogen against which no one has immunity. A novel flu virus that emerged after World War I killed as many as 50 million people. 
By closely monitoring viruses from people infected with avian flu, scientists can get a early warning as to whether these strains are mutating into forms that will make it easier to fit into human receptors, Kawaoka says.

The headaches, colds and sniffles associated with 'sick building syndrome' are more likely a sign of poor work satisfaction, a new study shows
So-called sick building syndrome does not exist, according to a UK study that suggests its cold-like symptoms can be mainly pinned to job stress, dissatisfaction and poor office relationships.
Dr Mai Stafford, of University College London, and colleagues publish their findings today in the journal Occupational and Environmental Medicine.
The research is part of the prestigious Whitehall study, a wider body of work looking at the health of public servants.
Sick building syndrome is a popular yet vague term to describe headaches, coughs, tired or itchy eyes, runny noses or inexplicable tiredness that are usually blamed on poor air quality in the office.
More than 4000 UK public servants, aged 42-62 and working in 44 different buildings across London, were questioned about their health. 
They were asked to list any symptoms of sick building syndrome, the physical properties of their offices and the demands of their job, including levels of support at work. 
Separately, the buildings were also assessed by independent field workers. 
They checked temperature, lighting intensity, levels of airborne bacteria, fungi and dust, humidity, ventilation flow, noise level and concentrations of CO2 and airborne organic chemicals. 
One in seven of the men and nearly one in five of the women respondents reported five or more symptoms of the syndrome. 
Hot, dry and dusty
There was some evidence, but minor, that those who reported high levels of the symptoms worked in offices that were too hot and dry and had relatively high levels of airborne germs and dust. 
But those with only low levels of the symptoms worked in buildings where there was poor air circulation and unacceptably high levels of CO2, noise, fungus and airborne chemicals. 
In fact, the biggest factors linked with the symptoms were job stress and lack of support in the workplace.
"'Sick building syndrome' may be wrongly named," say the authors. 
"Raised symptom reporting appears to be due less to poor physical conditions than to a working environment characterised by poor psychosocial conditions." 
A long line of research
Previously research has highlighted a link between ill health and control over work, job demands, work overload and job category. 
If sick building syndrome may not exist, its symptoms do, and they cost companies dearly in lost production, the paper says.
It says the lesson for bosses is that when such symptoms come to light, they should consider causes that go beyond the office's physical design and operation and delve into more complex areas, such as job roles and the autonomy of the workforce.

Dissolving CO2 deep in the oceans needs to be considered, says a German expert who is calling for more research
Pumping carbon dioxide into the oceans may be one way to help save us from global warming, says a chemical engineer who admits the subject is "taboo".
Professor Wolfgang Arlt, who has been visiting Australia's Swinburne University of Technology in Melbourne, says governments see this so-called ocean sequestration as too politically risky, compared to geosequestration, when CO2 emissions are buried underground.
Since ocean sequestration was first proposed 20 years ago, Arlt says it has been the subject of relatively little research, and he is calling for more.
"I want to have every option equally researched," he says, emphasising that reduction of CO2 emissions is the first priority before any form of sequestration.
Alrt, who is based at the University of Erlangen-Nuremburg in Germany, stresses he is not supporting ocean sequestration, only its investigation as an option to help stop global warming.
Arlt's speciality includes the science of separating different chemicals such as CO2 and air and he calls ocean sequestration "the natural option".
"Nature does it already," he says. "If you look at our total emissions of carbon dioxide, one part is stored in the air, and the other part is dissolved in the ocean."
The oceans are Earth's main buffer system, he says.
He says increased concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere has led to increased amounts of the gas dissolved in the surface of the ocean and this in turn has led to an increase in ocean acidity that is harmful to marine life.
Going deeper
But, says Arlt, his initial calculations suggest ocean sequestration does not have to significantly increase the acidity of the oceans as long as the CO2 is injected deep into the ocean and is mixed across the whole planet.
Arlt says CO2 can be injected into "down-welling" areas of the ocean and, in its dissolved form, will tend to stay at the bottom of the ocean where it can then be mixed by deep ocean currents across the planet.
He says one modelling exercise suggests CO2 injected near Europe will be distributed as far as Australia in 100 years time.
Arlt says he predicts that the effect on ocean acidity using this method would be so small it would be unmeasurable, and would not affect sea life on the ocean bottom. But he thinks this should be investigated further.
He says another option is to neutralise the CO2 before sequestering it in the oceans by mixing it with alkaline minerals such as limestone.
IPCC warns on ocean acidification
A recent report on CO2 capture and storage from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) canvasses options for ocean sequestration but does not include Arlt's argument.
The report says ocean sequestration could help lock up CO2 for hundreds of years, with deeper injection being more effective than shallower injection.
But it warns increased acidity at the ocean surface can harm marine organisms.
The report does not mention Arlt's point about down-welling waters and deep ocean currents.
Alrt says the IPCC had wanted him to co-author the report, but because of time problems he did not contribute. 
"So my ideas are not inside the report," he says.
The IPCC report notes that the effect of increased CO2 in the deep ocean has yet to be studied.
Whole range of options
An Australian co-author of the IPCC report, Dr Peter Cook, chief executive of the Co-operative Research Centre for Greenhouse Gas Technologies, agrees little is known about ocean sequestration and more research is always good.
"We're going to need the whole range of options for decreasing CO2 emissions," he says.
But he says the IPCC took a "very cautious view" about the future of ocean sequestration.
"We have to be very careful about doing it before we have a great deal more information," Cook says.

Drainage from the southernmost dome of Greenland
Polar ice sheets are melting faster than expected and could push sea levels up as much as 6 metres by 2100, scientists warn in two studies released today.
Based on current warming trends, they say, average temperatures could jump at least 2.5&deg;C by the end of the century, resembling the last great global warming surge 129,000 years ago when seas rose as much. 
Professor Jonathan Overpeck of the University of Arizona and Dr Bette Otto-Bliesner of the National Center for Atmospheric Research, co-wrote both studies, which appear in the latest issue of the journal Science.
They used a computer model for future climate predictions and ice sheet simulations to create a picture of the Earth's climate 129,000 years ago. 
They also used climate-indicative data from sediments, fossils and ice cores. 
They conclude that the melting of ice sheets in Greenland and in the Antarctic today resembles what happened back then, and that the risk of a comparable rise in sea level is high. 
"Although the focus of our work is polar, the implications are global. These ice sheets melted before and sea levels rose. The warmth needed isn't that much above present conditions," Otto-Bliesner says. 
Dynamic maps of the projected results of the rise in sea levels are available on Overpeck's website.
Call for action
Overpeck says we need to act soon.
"We need to start serious measures to reduce greenhouse gases within the next decade. If we don't do something soon, we're committed to 4-6 metres of sea level rise in the future," he says. 
A conservative estimate would call for sea level rises of 1 metre per century, he says.
He cautioned, however, that this estimate assumes the Earth will get only as hot as it did 129,000 years ago when the ice sheets melted. 
The earlier ice melt was concentrated in the Northern Hemisphere in the summer months, and was due largely to changes in Earth's orbit, he says. 
"The climate warming we're in now is global and it's year-round and it's due to human influences on the climate system," he says.
"That will be more damaging to the ice sheets than the that warming we had 130,000 years ago." 
The ice sheets are already melting, accelerated by relatively warm water that eats away at them, says NASA glacier expert Dr Bob Bindschadler.
"It's not really a debate any more about whether sea level is rising or not. I think the debate has shifted to, how rapidly is sea level rising," he says.

The research behind the 2006 Abel Prize for maths explains how violin strings vibrate
The world's most prestigious maths prize has been awarded to a Swedish researcher for his work on wave patterns.
Professor Lennart Carleson of the Royal Institute of Technology in Sweden was awarded the Abel Prize for maths for his work on the Fourier series.
This says that everything from the vibration of violin strings to the spread of heat through a metal bar can be viewed as sums of simple wave patterns, oscillating sine and cosine waves.
This led to the branch of maths known as harmonic analysis.
He also solved the so-called corona problem, which looks at structures that show up around a disc when the disc itself is hidden.
An example might be the corona of the Sun seen during an eclipse, when it's hidden by the Moon.
The prize, which is awarded by the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters, is often described as the 'Nobel' prize for maths.
The prize rules say it should aim to spur interest in mathematics among children and young people. So far, all winners of the prize have been in their 70s.

This pattern of spirals was made using a computer that analysed someone's voice
An Australian digital artist is using his voice to design textiles.
Pierre Proske has developed computer software that translates different frequencies in someone's voice into spiral patterns, producing what he calls 'voiceprints'.
Proske developed the software while doing his masters in art and technology at Sweden's IT University of Göteborg.
He's used the software to design a pattern inspired by elements of Japanese textiles, a design that appeals to him because of its simple repeated elements.
"Computer code is very simple and minimalistic, you have these ones and zeros, so I thought it would be good to choose a very minimalistic textile as well."
The textile is made up of repeated spirals of more or less the same size in a particular dense and fairly regular arrangement (see image below). 
Proske then scanned one of the spirals into his computer as the basic element in his voiceprint design.
Next he used the software to analyse the frequency profile of a short sample of a voice.
"You might get a bunch of low frequencies and some high frequencies depending on what you say and how you say it," he says.
The software translates the relative amounts of different frequencies of a particular sound into a particular layout of spirals of different sizes.
Different voice sounds can create different layouts of the spirals, says Proske.
He says the software could be used to generate patterns for textile and graphic design.
"The idea is that it is actually meant to be quite accessible. Anybody could use their voice to generate these patterns."
Proske sees his research as a modern take on old technologies.
"I'm kind of inspired by the connection of textiles and computers because they have a historical link that goes back to the automation of the loom in the 1800s," he says. 
Proske says the same punched cardboard cards used to code for textile patterns were later used to program the first computers.

Chocolate may give you short-term pleasure if you crave it. But it's not an antidepressant, as many people think
Chocoholics can happily eat chocolate for pleasure, but for those who are stressed and clinically depressed, the high is short-lived and chocolate may even deepen the downer, a review shows.
The findings, which will be published in the Journal of Affective Disorders, fly in the face of the myth that chocolate is an antidepressant.
The analysis, which is the most comprehensive literature review on how chocolate affects mood, shows that the motivation behind eating chocolate determines which neurotransmitters are activated, and hence your mood.
The review's Australian authors, from the Black Dog Institute at the Prince of Wales Hospital in Sydney, identified two groups of chocolate eaters based on motivation.
They identified the cravers, who eat chocolate as an indulgent pleasure, and the emotional eaters, who use chocolate in a bid to alleviate depression.
Professor Gordon Parker, executive director of the Black Dog Institute and lead author, says cravers see chocolate like a good glass of wine, and anticipating and eating the treat releases 'feel good' neurotransmitters. 
"Chocolate craving as an indulgent pleasure seems to stimulate the dopamine system in the brain, and provides an enjoyable experience," he says.
"But the emotional eaters, people who eat chocolate to relieve boredom, stress or clinical depression, are looking for an opioid effect to improve their mood."
For them, at best chocolate only provides temporary relief, he says. But this is quickly followed by a return to or a worsening of their earlier negative state.
Consuming sweet foods is thought to release the neurotransmitter beta-endorphin in the hypothalamus, which is said to have an opiate effect on the body. 
But why the chocolate high is so transient and insufficient to sustain mood in those who eat it for emotional reasons remains unknown. 
Busting the myth
The theory that chocolate acts as an antidepressant comes from the common belief that a serotonin deficiency causes chocolate cravings, but the review found no support for this hypothesis.
"It is true that chocolate acts on the same neurological system as serotonin. But you'd have to eat a truck load of chocolate before you have had the equivalent of one antidepressant tablet," Parker says.
"Our review rejects any possibility that chocolate desired as a way of relieving stress or when feeling down has any antidepressant benefit."  
Stimulants such as caffeine, theobromine, tyramine and phenylethylamine, are also present in concentrations too low to have any significant psychoactive effect, the review says.
For more information about depression, including fact sheets, support and referrals, see the websites for beyondblue, Australia's national depression initiative, and depressioNet.

If this research applies to humans, scientists might have another source of stem cells
Scientists have isolated sperm-producing stem cells from adult mice that have similar properties to embryonic stem cells.
If the same type of cells in humans show similar qualities the German researchers believe the cells could be used in stem cell research.
This would remove the ethical dilemma associated with stem cells derived from human embryos. 
"These isolated spermatogonial stem cells respond to culture conditions and acquire embryonic stem cell properties," say Professor Gerd Hasenfuss and his colleagues from the Georg-August-University of G&ouml;ttingen online in the journal Nature. 
Stem cells are master cells that have the potential to develop into any cell type in the body.
And some scientists believe they could act as a type of repair system to provide new therapies for illnesses ranging from diabetes to Parkinson's. 
But their use is controversial because some scientits say the most promising stem cells for treating human disease are derived from very early human embryos left over from fertility treatments.
In the report Hasenfuss and his team describe how they isolated the sperm-producing stem cells from mice testes.
The cells, which they call multipotent adult germline stem cells, under certain conditions, act like embryonic stem cells. 
When the researchers injected the cells into early embryos they found the cells contributed to the development of different organs. 
Intruiging, but more work needed
Professor Chris Higgins, the director of the UK's Medical Research Council Clinical Sciences Centre, says the possibility of using the cells as an alternative to embryonic stem cells for therapy is intriguing.
"However, much more research is required before the similarities and differences between these testes cells and embryonic stem cells are understood, and before their potential for use in therapy can be properly assessed," he says.
Dr Stephen Minger, a stem cell biologist at Kings College London, describes the findings as "pretty amazing" but says more research is needed. 
"We would need to replicate this in humans, just because it works in a mouse doesn't necessarily mean it will also work in people," he says.

Chatting on a mobile phone before sleep affects the electrical activity of your brain
Radiation from mobile phones stimulates brain activity in the early stages of sleep even after you've finished using the phone, an Australian study shows.
Associate Professor Andrew Wood from the Brain Sciences Institute at Melbourne's Swinburne University says his study also found that exposure to electromagnetic radiation from mobile phones can reduce levels of the hormone melatonin, which is connected to the body's sleep-wake cycle.
But the study, reported in the International Journal of Radiation Biology, says it's premature to conclude that talking on your mobile phone before bed will get in the way of a good night's sleep.
Alpha waves
The study's 55 participants received 30 minutes of mobile phone radiation, or 30 minutes of 'sham' radiation, on successive Sunday nights before being tucked into bed.
Wood found that exposure to mobile phone radiation resulted in heightened alpha-wave activity in the brain. Alpha waves are associated with relaxation and daydreaming but normally disappear with sleep.
"We found that in the first hour or so after getting to sleep that there was a significant change in one of the parameters of brain activity, that is the amount of alpha waves in the brain wave patterns," he says.
The increase occurred in the first non-REM period of the night, when subjects had drifted off but before they were in deep sleep.
Australian sleep specialist Professor Leon Lack, from Flinders University in Adelaide, says this could be a sign that the first non-REM period of sleep isn't as efficient as it could be, leaving people feeling tired when they wake up.
"Alpha waves are really only present when you're lying awake with your eyes closed trying to fall asleep," he says.
"If they are occurring during what would normally be sleep stages [it could be] the intrusion of some sort of wakeful brain activity at a time when it shouldn't be there."
Melatonin 
Researchers also tested participants' urine for markers of the hormone melatonin, which is produced in the evening and is associated with individual sleeping and waking rhythms.
Wood says some participants had an increased amount of melatonin after exposure, although there was no overall increase.
"Some people had significantly less of this melatonin marker in their urine before they went to bed but overall the amount of melatonin didn't change," he says.
He says the difference was quite marked in some people, indicating there may be "a special subgroup of the population that are susceptible to the effects of mobile phone radiation".
Lack says melatonin's role in sleep is unclear and it's uncertain whether having more or less affects your sleep.
Wood says that at this stage mobile phones don't seem to influence how well you sleep, unless the phones ring at all hours or you've had a particularly exciting conversation.
"If people are finding they can't sleep after using mobile phones often it's the content of what they've been talking about that's the reason they can't sleep," he says.

Humpback whales have structured songs, with phrases and themes. But no-one knows what they mean
Humpback whales sing songs that contain elements of human language, according to a detailed new analysis of whale songs recorded in Hawaii.
While researchers do not yet believe that whales have their own language per se, they discovered striking similarities between human language and the songs of humpback whales (Megaptera novaeangliae). 
Lead researcher Ryuji Suzuki says that both humans and whales communicate by using discrete sound units that are arranged within a hierarchical structure. 
"For example, a text consists of paragraphs, a paragraph consists of sentences, a sentence consists of clauses etc," says Suzuki, at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
"They are at different levels of hierarchy, or layers.
"In terms of humpback songs, a song session consists of songs, a song consists of themes, a theme consists of phrases, a phrase consists of units." 
Put together, all of these elements indicate that whales have something akin to their own syntax, which normally refers to the grammatical arrangement of words within sentences. 
The findings are published in this month's Journal of the Acoustical Society of America. 
Suzuki and colleagues designed a computer program that converted tiny sections of whale songs into mathematical symbols. 
They then analysed the average amount of information that was conveyed for each symbol with a technique called information theory, which quantifies complexity and structure. 
"Information in the context of information theory does not include 'meaning', but it focuses on how rare, surprising, predictable or complex a message is," Suzuki explains. 
Listening to whale song
Human observers who had no previous knowledge about whale song structure grouped humpback whale recordings into complexity, redundancy and predictability. 
The computer analysis and the human observers all found that whale songs are not only hierarchical, they convey around one bit of information per second. 
By comparison, humans generate 10 bits of information, or variance, for every word that is spoken. 
Each spoken vowel or syllable, for example, contains at least a few bits of data that correspond to different sounds produced by the speaker. 
One versus 10 may not sound very impressive, but whales communicate in water, often over long distances. Water helps to transmit songs because it carries sound four times faster than air. 
Using information theory
Jennifer Miksis-Olds, a research associate at the University of Massachusetts at Dartmouth's School for Marine Science and Technology, is one of the few people in the world who is also using information theory to study whale songs. 
"I do agree with the new findings. I am currently using information theory to analyse humpback whale communication, and I have come to similar conclusions," Miksis-Olds says.
She agrees that marine mammal songs and sounds cannot be classified at present as language, but both she and Suzuki admit that they do not yet understand the meaning of whale songs and that more research is needed. 
"This is what we know [so] little about," Suzuki says. "[Humpback whale] singers are always male, and song is believed to be a mating display. The song type evolves over the mating season, and all animals in the same population seem to share the same song type, that is, humpback whales somehow copy each other's song.
"However, the details of this are unknown. What the songs mean is, again, unknown."

Combining alcohol with an energy drink makes you feel sober enough to drive even though you're over the limit, new research shows
People who combine energy drinks with alcohol can feel more sober than they truly are, a new study suggests. 
Brazilian researchers found that young men were no less impaired when they drank a mix of alcohol and a popular energy drink than when they downed a standard mixed drink. 
But drinkers seemed to think they were less drunk. 
According to research in the April issue of the journal Alcoholism: Clinical & Experimental Research, the drinkers reported less fatigue, fewer headache symptoms and better coordination.
This is concerning because people who mistakenly think they are less impaired can be a danger to themselves and others, according to study co-author Dr Maria Lucia Souza-Formigoni. 
"I think people should be aware of this effect of the combination. They feel better but they are not 'good enough' to drive, for instance," says Souza-Formigoni, an associate professor at the Federal University of Sao Paulo.
Energy drinks typically consist of carbohydrates, B vitamins, caffeine and taurine, a derivative of an amino acid found in animal tissue. 
Some studies have shown that the beverages, or their main ingredients, may improve mood and physical performance.
And there's a popular, though unproven, belief that mixing energy drinks with alcohol can counter some of the effects of drinking. 
This new study suggests that while energy drinks may help drinkers feel less tipsy, they are still in fact drunk.
Mixing your drinks
The study included 26 young men who each took part in three separate experiments: one in which they drank vodka mixed with an energy drink, another in which they had vodka mixed with fruit juice, and a third where they drank only the energy drink. 
In general, the researchers found that the men reported fewer headache symptoms and less weakness with the energy drink-alcohol mixture compared with the standard mixed drink. They also thought their hand-eye coordination was sharper. 
But the men performed no better on objective tests of hand-eye coordination and reaction time to visual cues. 
One of the dangers of this effect, according to Souza-Formigoni and her colleagues, is that drinkers, especially young ones, may feel free to drink more than they might otherwise have. 
Depressive effects on the brain
It's not clear, Souza-Formigoni says, why study participants feel less drunk when they had the energy drink even though they were still objectively impaired.
But in animal research, she and her colleagues have found that some energy drinks ingredients, mostly caffeine and taurine, may counter some of the depressive effects alcohol has on the brain. 
The findings in humans, however, suggest that's not enough to avoid becoming drunk.

Astronomy, physics, biology, architecture and inventing. Dr Robert Hooke tried them all. Seen here, a page from his Micrographia, a study of biological specimens viewed through a microscope he made himself
A manuscript charting the birth of modern science, lost for more than 200 years, goes on sale this week.
The journal of Dr Robert Hooke has been hailed as 'science's missing link' and has a price tag equivalent to about A$2.4 million (US$1.7 million).
It contains details of experiments Hooke conducted as curator at the UK's Royal Society from 1662 and his correspondence as its secretary from 1677. 
The notes include a celebrated row between Hooke and Sir Isaac Newton over planetary motion and gravity, and the lost record confirming the first observation of microbes by Antoni van Leeuwenhoek.
Hooke was a keen observer of nature with a fascination for things mechanical but, because of ill health as a child, he was initially left largely to educate himself. 
A talented artist, he was sent to London when his father died to study under leading portrait painter Peter Lely.
He went on to study first at Westminster School and then Christ College, Oxford where he won a place as a chorister. 
There he studied astronomy, tried his hand at mechanical flight and rubbed shoulders with top scientists of the day.
A meeting of these scientists in November 1660 founded the Society for the Promoting of Physico-Mathematical Experimental Learning, which in mid-1662 received a royal charter and became the Royal Society of London.
Biologist, astronomer, physicist
In 1665 Hooke finally found fame with publication of his Micrographia containing pictures of objects he had studied through a microscope he had made himself, and a number of biological discoveries. 
Diarist Samuel Pepys said of the book that it was the most ingenious he had ever read. 
But his talents did not stop there. 
Hooke discovered that Jupiter revolved on its own axis, suggested that gravity could be measured using a pendulum.
Architect, inventor
He was also a talented architect and was chief assistant to Sir Christopher Wren in rebuilding London after the Great Fire of 1666. 
He also suggested the presence of gravitational 'vortices' pulling comets from their orbit, and invented the reflecting telescope, the sextant, the punched-paper record-keeper, the wind gauge, the worm gear and the wheel barometer.
But he fell out with Newton when he accused him of stealing from his original ideas when he produced his theory of light and colour in 1672, and Newton removed all reference to Hooke from his famed Principia.
Hooke's law
Despite Hooke's huge contribution to science and understanding, the only innovation to bear his name is Hooke's law, which says that the extension of a spring is proportional to the force applied. 
Hooke died in London in March 1703 aged 67.
Experts from an auction house found his journal by chance in a cupboard at a private house in Hampshire during a routine valuation.

Researchers have developed a working interface between living tissue and silicon chips
European researchers have 'glued' live nerve cells onto a silicon chip and managed to get the neurones and chip to talk to each other.
The technology, which used networks of rat neurones grown in culture, could lead to the creation of 'neural prostheses' or the creation of 'organic computers' powered by living neurones, the team says.
The Italian, German and Swiss team says it took a lot of effort to develop a working interface between the living cells and the chip's inorganic compounds.
"We attacked the problems using two major strategies, through the semiconductor technology and the biology," says molecular biologist Professor Stefano Vassanelli from the University of Padua.
The team, which is being funded by the European Commission's Information Society Technologies program, put 12,384 transistors and hundreds of capacitors on a 1 millimetre square chip.
Then the reserearchers used proteins found in the brain to 'glue' the neurones to the chip, Vassanelli says.
The proteins also act as a link between the ion channels of the neurones and the semiconductors, allowing neural signals to be passed to the chip.
In the opposite direction, the chip's capacitors stimulated the neurones, causing them to 'fire'.
Vassanelli says the team's next project is to work out how chips could communicate with genes and vice versa.
"Genes are where memory comes from and without them you have no memory or computation," he says.
"We want to explore a way to use genes to control the neurochip."
Keeping neurones alive
Professor Ashley Craig, an Australian neuroscientist with the University of Technology, Sydney, says linking computer circuits with brain cells can kill neurones by interfering with the brain's fragile chemical and electrical balance.
And linking chips with genes may be an option.
Commenting on the European proposal, he says targeting genes instead would enable the chip to communicate with a network of cells.
"Genes contain the memory and knowledge of building things, growth and regrowth," he says.
"They would target a particular gene, maybe heart disease or addiction, and link it to a computer chip tucked away under your skin, and try and influence [gene communication]."

Scientists have thought of using soil microbes to break down styrofoam into a useful byproduct
Bacteria that break down styrofoam into 'green' byproducts could be used to make a new kind of biodegradable plastic, new research suggests.
The method could help reduce the tonnes of petroleum-based plastic waste that makes its way into landfills each year, says Irish research leader Dr Kevin O'Connor, who heads the bioplastic research group at University College Dublin.
O'Connor and his team's research results will appear in the 1 April issue of the journal Environmental Science and Technology. 
Scientists have already used microorganisms to break down the kinds of chemical products found in styrofoam.
But no-one has created a useful plastic byproduct, says Dr Manfred Zinn, a research group leader at EMPA, the materials science and technology lab of the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology. 
To convert the plastics, O'Connor's team used a strain of soil bacteria known as Pseudomonas putida. 
In nature, this microorganism lives in the ground, where it feeds on the carbon, nitrogen, hydrogen, and oxygen found in organic matter such as dead plants. 
Styrofoam, a material made from polystyrene, contains hydrogen and carbon, but not in a form that the bacteria can readily digest. 
To make the plastic edible, the scientists had to heat it under the process of pyrolysis, which melted the polystyrene at very high temperatures in an oxygen-free environment to break the chemical bonds. 
No oxygen means no burning and so no emissions. During the process, the polystyrene became liquid styrene, a carbon-based compound that the bacteria can eat. 
In the lab, the scientists created a growing environment for the bacteria, feeding them all their favourite foods, including nitrogen and oxygen. 
A steady flow of styrene oil supplied to the bacteria in a fermentor allowed the bacteria to proliferate. 
After the colony grew to a healthy size, the scientists stopped feeding the bacteria nitrogen. That stimulated the bacteria to begin storing the carbon for use later. 
Storing carbon is the key
It turns out that when the bacteria store the carbon, they convert it into a plastic known as polyhydroxyalkanoate, or PHA. 
PHA is made up of fatty acids that are easily attacked by the bacterial enzymes.
"PHA is a 100% biodegradable plastic that can be thrown on your compost heap. Bacteria in the compost heap use the plastic as food to grow, so there is no damage to the environment. You can't get greener than that for a plastic," says O'Connor. 
The compound can also be harvested from the bacteria to make biodegradable plastic goods such as shampoo bottles, credit cards, and medical implants and devices, all of which will fully degrade in the garbage, says O'Connor. 
"This is a great opportunity to make something better from a recycled material," says Zinn. 
O'Connor and team know that worldwide, more than 14 million tonnes of polystyrene are produced annually, but are unsure how much investment it would take to build a plant capable of converting the material into PHA. 
But he says the process works on any petrochemical plastic waste and that fact could open up new areas of exploration for the petrochemical industry.

Total solar eclipse, as seen in 2002
It has been called the Sun-eating dragon, the spirit of the dead and the eye of God. 
It has been a harbinger of great events, good and evil - famines, bumper harvests, wars, and the birth and death of kings.
Later today, we'll know it as the total eclipse of the Sun, when the Moon will be perfectly aligned with our star, and the lunar shadow will alight on the tip of eastern Brazil.
Racing eastwards across the Atlantic, the umbra will reach the coast of Ghana, then head across Togo, Benin, Nigeria, Niger, Chad, Libya, where the eclipse will be at its longest, lasting 4 minutes, 7 seconds, and then northwestern Egypt.
It will then zip across the Mediterranean, passing between Crete and Cyprus before making landfall in Turkey, traversing Georgia, southern Russia and then in Kazakhstan. 
The shadow briefly crosses Russia again before expiring at sunset in Mongolia after a marathon of 3 hours, 12 minutes and 14,500 kilometres.
Around 2500 kilometres either side of this path of totality, observers will get a partial eclipse. For instance, about a fifth of the Sun will be obscured in the UK, southern Sweden and the southern Gulf. 
Australia is among countries unable to see the eclipse. But ABC Science Online brings you photos, videos and commentary of the event as seen from Turkey.
See Chasing the Sun in Turkey for more information.
Far back in time
Eclipses are infrequent events, and their rarity is enhanced by the fact that most take place over the ocean, which covers two-thirds of the world's surface, and so they go unwitnessed except by seafarers and remote islanders.
But writings dating back to the dawn of civilisation testify to thrill and dread as the Sun, the bringer of life, was gradually blotted out, the stars appeared in an indigo sky, the terrified birds stopped singing and bats left their roost. 
"Nothing can be surprising any more, or impossible or miraculous, now that Zeus, father of the Olympians, has made night out of noonday, hiding the bright sunlight, and fear has come upon mankind," wrote the Greek poet Archilochus after an eclipse in 648 BC. 
"After this, men can believe anything, expect anything. 
"Don't any of you be surprised in future if land beasts change places with dolphins and go to live in their salty pastures, and get to like the sounding waves of the sea more than the land, while the dolphins prefer the mountains." 
For the ancient Chinese, the eclipse was a Sun-eating dragon, which had to be scared away by the banging of cymbals and pans.
For the Vikings, it was caused by two chasing wolves, Skoll and Hati. Hindu mythology blames a demon called Rahu who spitefully takes a bite out of the Sun from time to time. 
Even today, in some cultures, eclipses are believed to bring poisonous vapours and so food and water containers are turned upside-down in protection. 
Watching and waiting
The most-observed solar eclipse took place in 1999, when the path of totality crossed major population centres in Europe, the Middle East and Asia. 
This year, no big city lies directly on the 185 kilometre-wide path, although several, including Ankara, Lagos and Tbilisi, lie very close to it and will get a near-total eclipse. 
The luckiest of all are people who inhabit the mountains of central Turkey, says NASA's veteran eclipse specialist, Dr Fred Espenak. 
"A quarter million people in Sivas have the opportunity of witnessing a second total eclipse from their homes in less than seven years," he says.

In clever kids, the brain's cortex or outer mantle thickens rapidly during adolescence
Intelligence may have more to do with how the brain develops during adolescence than its overall size, researchers say.
US scientists at the National Institutes of Health show that the brains of children with high IQs show a distinct pattern of development. 
The cortex, or outer mantle of the brain, starts out thinner and thickens more rapidly in very intelligent children. It peaks around 11 or 12 years old before thinning rapidly in the late teens.
"We found that the cortex showed a different pattern of development," says Dr Philip Shaw, lead author of the research published today in the journal Nature.
Youngsters with average IQs have a thicker cortex to start with and peak earlier before gradual thinning begins. 
Shaw adds that the changes are subtle and what is driving them is a mystery. Why children have a thicker or thinner cortex initially is also not known. 
"Brainy children are not cleverer solely by virtue of having more or less grey matter at any one age," says Dr Judith Rapoport, a co-author of the study. 
"Rather IQ is related to the dynamics of cortex maturation."
The scientists took magnetic resonance imaging scans of 307 healthy children and teenagers, aged 5-19, every two years as they grew up. 
They compared the scans to see how they related to the children's IQ. Very intelligent youngsters had scores of 121-145 while high IQs were between 109-120 and average between 83-108. 
The smartest youngsters showed the highest rate of change in the scans. The scientists believe the longer thickening time in the very brainy children might indicate a longer period for the development of high-level cognitive circuits in the brain. 
The researchers add that the thinning phase could involve a "use it or lose it" pruning, or killing off, of brain cells and their connections as the brain matures and becomes more efficient. 
"That might be happening more efficiently in the most intelligent children," says Shaw. "People with very agile minds tend to have a very agile cortex."

Astronomers have found mid-sized moonlets embedded in Saturn's rings. But that doesn't fit with current models of how the rings formed
Minute moons just a hundred metres or so across orbit Saturn within its rings, astronomers report, a finding that questions how the planet's majestic ring system came into being.
Researchers report their findings today in the journal Nature. 
The prevailing theory is that Saturn's rings, reflected by the distant Sun, comprise the remnants of an icy moon that long ago was smashed open by an asteroid or comet. 
But a collision of this kind normally gives rise to debris in a wide range of sizes, from big lumps a kilometre wide to pebbles a few centimetres across. 
Photographs and radar sensing by scout probes, though, have until now shown Saturn's ring particles to be remarkably small, between a few centimetres to a few metres across. 
The only big exceptions were a pair of kilometre-wide moons called Pan and Daphnis that lurk within the ring system. There seemed to be nothing in the intermediate size. 
The missing rocks
Astronomers led by Dr Matthew Tiscareno of Cornell University, New York, believe they have found some of the missing medium-sized rocks. 
Their evidence comes from data sent back by the orbiting US spacecraft Cassini, which shows gaps, shaped rather like a propeller blade or an elongated teardrop, in some of the rings. 
Tiscareno's team deduct that the gaps are caused by what they call embedded moonlets.
These are rocks about 100 metres across that were too small to be seen in the Cassini pictures but which must have briefly scattered the particles as they orbited, rather like a ship forms a bow wave and trails a wake that then closes  behind it. 
Four of the teardrop gaps have been spotted so far, and more may emerge later this year when Cassini returns to the ring system to view it from a different angle. 
The finding is the latest evidence to suggest that Saturn's seven rings, first spotted by Galileo in 1610 according to legend, are a dynamic, continuous evolving structure. 
The debris becomes clustered, gets torn apart by collision and is then reassembled by Saturn's gravitational forces and the particles' own gravitational attraction. 
Research presented last year found that the outermost A ring has many empty spaces.
And part of the innermost D ring has become dimmer and moved closer to Saturn by about 200 kilometres since it was observed by the US probe Voyager in 1980 and 1981.

Much is at stake under the new research funding plan, both for the older established universities and the new ones
A proposed plan requiring Australian universities to prove their impact on business and the community before they get government research funding has met with a mixed response.
And curiously, universities that focus on applied research are worried they could lose out under the proposed plan.
Federal science and education minister, Julie Bishop, this week released a report that recommends an overhaul of the way university research funding is allocated.
The final advice to government on the Research Quality Framework (RQF) comes after two years of deliberation.
Under the current "metrics-based" system, the government allocates block funding to universities based on a formula.
The formula values such things as success in gaining competitive grants, the number of students completing PhDs and the number of publications produced.
The new system would use expert panels to allocate funds based on a more detailed assessment of research quality, and, for the first time, an assessment of the impact of the research on "end-users of research".
Go8 response
The Group of 8 (Go8) universities, welcome the idea of measuring impact but have some concerns.
"While impact is very important and research should always be done with some outcomes in mind, we shouldn't expect that every bit of research that's being done in our universities is able to predict the sorts of outcomes [it will have]," says Go8 executive director, Virginia Walsh.
The large "sandstone" universities that make up the Go8 have the largest output of high-profile international research collaboration and publications, and receive the lion's share of research funding under the current system.
The Go8 says the new plan is modelled on a 20-year old UK system that is about to be disbanded and replaced by a metrics-based system.
"It's ironic," says Walsh, "that we are looking at the possibility of emulating something that has now been replaced by something much closer to what we've currently got."
Other universities nervous too
Outside the Go8 are newer and generally smaller universities that tend to focus more on applied research.
While you might think a system that values impact might work in their favour, such universities are nervous they could lose out under the new plan to the larger universities.
Professor Greg Baxter of the New Generation Universities group, for example, says it will depend on how research "impact" is measured and weighted against research "quality".
"I think the potential for significant disadvantage for universities like us is clearly there because you can set up the rules and the metrics to advantage the Group of 8 should it be so desired," says Baxter who is pro vice-chancellor of research at Victoria University.
Professor Andris Stelbovics, of the Innovative Research Universities Australia group of universities is also worried about the relative weight that will be given to impact and quality.
"We do pure basic research or research based purely on scholarship," says Stelbovics, who is pro vice-chancellor of research of Murdoch University. "But we also have quite a few research teams that work in applied areas."
He says he is concerned about how a university research consultancy with local government to solve waste management problems would be valued under the new system.
His group also wants funding for agricultural problems such as wheat rust disease, which is only of relevance to a small group of countries including Australia, to be valued equally in terms of impact with research of global significance.
Timetable questions
Minister Bishop has set up a new group headed by chief scientist Dr Jim Peacock to advise on the implementation of the new plan once it's finalised and accepted by the government.
But universities are concerned about the proposed timetable for implementation.
Walsh thinks it will take at least another year to work out the details of the plan, including a cost-benefit analysis.
And the universities also want to make sure they are given money to implement the new system so their researchers are researching rather than filling out audit forms.
"If they were to do it extremely well, it's probably too expensive," says Baxter. "And if they do it on the cheap it may not be any better than the system we've currently got."

Dr Jeffrey Stilwell in the background with PhD student Chris Consoli holding the theropod toe bone fossil they found on the Chatham Islands
The first proof that land-dwelling dinosaurs lived on remote islands in the South Pacific has been unveiled by an Australian-based researcher.
Dr Jeffrey Stilwell, a palaeontologist from Melbourne's Monash University, says he discovered the fossilised foot, finger and spinal bones of carnivorous dinosaurs on the Chatham Islands, about 850 kilometres east of New Zealand. 
The discovery confirms the Chathams were once connected to New Zealand by a finger-like extension, Stilwell says.
"Prior to our discoveries, only a few isolated examples of dinosaur fossils had been found in the northern part of New Zealand," he says. 
"Now we've found dinosaur remains almost 1000 kilometres east out in the middle of the South Pacific."
He adds that his team has already uncovered more dinosaur fossils in the Chathams than had been unearthed in New Zealand over the past 25 years. 
While some dinosaur remains had been found along the Antarctic peninsula and in South America, this is the first such discovery in the southwest Pacific and is possibly unique in the southern hemisphere, he says. 
"[The dinosaurs] were on their own evolutionary path for probably 15 million years since the separation of the Chathams-New Zealand region some 85-80 million years ago," he says. 
Stilwell found the first fossils by accident when he visited the Chatham Islands in 2003. 
"No one had even hypothesised that there were any fossils out that far," he says. 
With a grant from the National Geographic Society, Stilwell and associates returned to the archipelago to continue their research, the first findings of which were published in the journal Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology. 
But he says a subsequent trip to the islands in February yielded a "huge collection" of new fossils, which are still being analysed. 
"The story's going to get better," he says.

New guidelines recommend 30 chest compressions to every two breaths to improve blood flow to the heart and brain
New advice on how best to perform cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) suggests doubling the number of chest compressions, Australian emergency medicine experts say.
This should mean more sustained blood flow, especially to the heart and brain.
The move, which was announced recently by the Australian Resuscitation Council, is now in line with international consensus and best evidence, say the experts.
The new protocol recommends 30 chest compressions to every two breaths when resuscitating infants, children or adults.
The pattern of two ventilations then 30 compressions should continue, to achieve a rate of 100 compressions a minute, says council chair and University of Western Australia lecturer in emergency medicine, Associate Professor Ian Jacobs.
He hopes the one conversion rate for all basic life support rescue attempts and patients would be easier to remember and increase the likelihood people will at least try CPR. 
The new protocol also recommends compressions be delivered faster and harder, people should visualise the centre of the chest and compress there, interruptions should be minimised, a defibrillator attached urgently, other ventilation avoided and says any attempt at resuscitation is better than no attempt.
Kelli Mitchener from the Australian College of Critical Care Nurses and a nurse at Melbourne's Austin Hospital, says the new ratio means better blood flow.
"By increasing the number of compressions it means there will be fewer pauses where blood circulation is not occurring, hopefully improving the patient's outcome," she says.
The changes are based on a review of published evidence which found giving more compressions may help save more lives and a consensus developed by the International Liaison Committee on Resuscitation published in the journals Resuscitation and Circulation.
"There are 30,000-35,000 cardiac arrests annually in Australia - due to a heart attack, drowning or drug overdose for example - but less than half receive CPR before an ambulance arrives and most [who don't] will die," says Jacobs.
The guidelines, which are available online, are for the public but include sections for doctors, hospitals and ambulance officers.
St John Ambulance begins teaching the new techniques in its first aid classes from April.

A new lubricant that forms polymers to protect engine wear also saves oil, according to new research
A new smart lubricant that forms a protective film when it meets two surfaces rubbing together means engines need less oil, a chemical conference has heard this week.
Using about 4.5 grams of the lubricant saves more than 450 grams of oil, according to a presentation at the American Chemical Society's meeting this week in Atlanta.
While its inventors do not believe the lubricant can replace standard motor oil in vehicles, they say it may someday replace the oil used to test engines and mechanical systems. 
Additives developed from the same technology could also stave off wear, improve engine performance and reduce pollutants, its developers say.
The technology behind the new compounds is called tribopolymerisation. 
"By tribopolymerisation, we mean the use of small molecules in a fluid, such as an oil, to reduce wear and damage of the sliding surfaces by forming thin polymer films, which offer protection," says US researcher Professor Michael Furey, from Virginia Tech, who developed the process with Czeslaw Kajdas and colleagues at the Radom Technical University in Poland. 
"It is a process of molecular design. We do not add any polymers to the system, nor do we coat surfaces with polymers. Instead, our monomers are designed to form thin polymer films directly on the rubbing surfaces continuously and only where needed," Furey says. 
The international team of scientists has been working on the project since 1981, but recent developments include a precise way of measuring what happens as the films form; the discovery of new classes of compounds, such as the engine lubricant; and agreements with three organisations who hope to further develop and market the technology. 
Furey says that 16 engines recently were treated with about 4.5 grams of the smart composition. 
"All passed the run-in tests successfully with no signs of damage," he says. "In a subsequent series of tests in a different factory location, 24 engines were pre-treated the same way. All 24 engines were in perfect condition after the run-in tests. The results were quite amazing." 
Smelly fumes
He and his colleagues also say the technology could reduce the "emission of smelly fumes" from the use of diesel in trucks, cars, buses and equipment. 
Currently, many countries, such as Sweden, and US states, like California, have imposed limits on the sulfur content of diesel fuels, since sulfur oxide is one of the stinkiest pollutants. 
The catch is that the substitute low-sulfur fuels increase wear and tear on the fuel injector and fuel pump, according to the researchers, who say they have invented diesel fuel "lubricity additives" that work with low-sulfur fuels to reduce their damage on the engine. 
Dr Jorn Larsen-Basse, former director of the Surface Engineering and Tribology Program at the US National Science Foundation, says the technology is "innovative". 
"It works well with metal surfaces, especially steel, because molecules stick onto it easily. The engine pretreatment application might very well be possible," Larsen-Basse says.
The inventors hope to conduct further studies on how high surface temperatures and other engine factors affect the performance of the new compounds.

Power poles damaged by Cyclone Larry, which hit northern Australia last month. But cyclones can be a lot worse, says one expert
Cyclones like Larry are not as intense as we think, says a cyclone risk engineer.
And if we don't get our forecasts right, he says Australia could be left unprepared for the worst.
Dr Bruce Harper, a Queensland-based consultant who has a long association with the Bureau of Meteorology, says Cyclone Larry, which hit the northern town of Innisfail recently, was not as powerful as people think.
He says while the bureau predicted the cyclone would hit land as a category 5 cyclone, with winds of around 290 kilometres per hour, the closest weather stations showed it was a lot weaker.
Harper says a station at South Johnstone, 7 kilometres from Innisfail, showed wind speeds of 180 kilometres per hour.
And the maximum speeds recorded at the nearest offshore station were at Flinders Reef, which measured 240 kilometres per hour.
Both these measurements fall within the definition of a category 4 cyclone.
"My estimation is that it was a low category 4," says Harper, who also advises local and state governments on cyclone risk and insurers on estimated losses from cyclones.
"It wasn't 290 kilometres [per hour] and if it was there would be barely a house standing in parts of Innisfail," he says.
"The community needs to know that cyclones can be a lot worse than this."
Inaccuracy not significant
Gary Foley of the Bureau of Meteorology in Melbourne acknowledges the cyclone was weaker than predicted.
But, he says when all the data is in, the actual wind speed will probably be calculated to be just 40 or 50 kilometres per hour less than what was predicted.
"So how does that translate to a person making a response before the storm hits. Do you put in a couple more nails in the roof or something?"
While Harper acknowledges the bureau helped people prepare for a severe cyclone and is keen to emphasise the agency does the best with the technology and resources it has, he says a difference of 50 kilometres per hour could have a huge impact on damage.
And he also thinks that even after final estimates are made the bureau will still be overestimating the strength of Larry and he says such overestimates present broader problems.
Higher and lower estimates
Harper says most predictions of cyclone intensities can't be accurately verified because there aren't enough weather stations collecting data on how strong the winds really are when they hit land.
But, he says, cyclone risk engineers like himself use the closest weather station measurements, along with the actual damage caused by cyclones, to make their own estimates of the strengths of cyclones once they hit land.
This information is used to build models that help develop building authorities to specify standards for cyclone-proof houses.
And the models help insurance companies work out how much money they need to keep aside for cyclone damage payouts.
Harper says estimates by cyclone risk engineers are almost always lower than those provided by meteorological predictions.
And he is concerned that the more widely publicised overestimates from the bureau might lead to public complacency.
It could give people a false impression of cyclone impacts and downplay the importance of building cyclone-resistant buildings, he says.
Uncertainties
Harper says one of the reasons why the bureau is overestimating the strength of cyclones is because there are huge uncertainties in their measurements.
He says the satellite technology they use to measure cloud temperature as a proxy for wind speed is out-dated.
It doesn't take into consideration the fact that cyclones can change rapidly or the fact that the size of a cyclone can affect its intensity, he says.
Harper says the bureau should have more radar to measure actual wind speed, and possibly fly aircraft through cyclones to collect data, as occurs in the US.
And there should be many more weather stations around the country so predictions can be more easily verified and models adjusted accordingly.
The bureau's Foley agrees that, given the funds, better technology and more weather stations would give more accurate predictions but doubts it would be worth the cost.
He appreciates engineers like Harper would like more weather stations but says the bureau can't be expected to be all things to all people and given the uncertainty that exists they would rather err on the side of caution.

The chemical composition of the Sun appears very different to what we assumed, analysis of Moon soil has revealed
Analysis of the first sample of lunar soil collected by Neil Armstrong has thrown into disarray what researchers believe about the Sun, an international team of scientists says.
Dr Trevor Ireland from the Australian National University and colleagues report in the journal Nature today the results of a study of oxygen isotopes on the surface of soil grains returned to Earth by the 1969 Apollo 11 mission.
It was hoped the study would provide clues about the chemical make-up of the Sun and the proto-planetary soup that gave birth to our solar system.
In particular, researchers hoped to find evidence for either of the two reigning theories about the Sun's composition.
According to one theory, the Sun has a similar oxygen composition to the planets.
The other theory suggests it has enriched levels of the isotope oxygen-16.
Instead, the study indicates that while the Sun is dissimilar to bodies like the Earth and meteorites, it has lower levels of oxygen-16 than expected.
"This was a completely unexpected result for us," Ireland says. "Our Sun is not the Sun that we thought it was."
The finding also suggests the Sun somehow ended up with a different composition from the cloud of dust and gas that preceded it, Ireland says.
He says this is based on other small rocky bodies, known as carbonate chondrites, which are the oldest known things in the solar system and have up to 500 times more oxygen-16 than other oxygen isotopes.
Solar winds
Ireland says while we can't get samples directly from the Sun, we can infer its composition by looking at lunar samples, which are believed to reflect its composition.
This is because lunar soil contains oxygen isotopes "implanted" by solar winds carrying elements blown out from the Sun.
But after using a caesium beam to erode the surface of the soil grains and measure the isotopes oxygen-16, oxygen-17 and oxygen-18, the researchers discovered unexpectedly low levels of oxygen-16.
"We found that the oxygen did not agree with either a planetary composition or the oxygen-16 rich composition," Ireland says.
"The oxygen isotopes are telling us that the mix of components in the Sun is different to that in the planets, particularly in regard to the amount of dust versus gas that comprises the Sun versus the planets."
Ireland says an analysis of oxygen from Jupiter's atmosphere, comets and other bodies in the solar system could shed more light on the mystery.

Vietnam's fight against bird flu
Humans infected with bird flu appear to have more of the virus in their throat and nose than people with standard human influenza strains, a conference is due to hear today.
The findings may help explain why avian influenza A (H5N1) has such a high death rate in humans, more than 50% mortality.
Dr Menno de Jong, head of the virology department at the University of Oxford's clinical research unit at the Hospital for Tropical Diseases in Ho Chi Minh City, studied 17 patients with bird flu.
He found the virus is often associated with disseminated infection in blood and faeces, and with higher levels of viral replication in the nasopharynx compared with contemporary Vietnamese influenza cases.
High viral levels, disseminated infection and an intense inflammatory response also seem associated with poor outcomes, he is due to tell the Australasian Society for Infectious Diseases annual scientific meeting in Wellington, New Zealand today. 
"Our main findings are that influenza H5N1 seems to be characterised by high virus levels in the respiratory tract, evidence suggesting disseminated infection [virus detection in blood and rectum] and [likely as a result of this] an intense inflammatory response," de Jong says.
High levels of viral replication are likely to play a role in determining a patient's outcome by direct effects of the virus or by the inflammatory response to the virus, he says.
"The reason for the high mortality probably is not high replication rates per se, but high replication rates of an extremely virulent virus," he says.
Antiviral drugs should be started early to prevent as much inflammatory response as possible, he says.
Two of the people in his study developed resistance to the antiviral drug oseltamivir and died, as reported in the New England Journal of Medicine last December.
Resistance implies suboptimal suppression of replication and strategies to minimise it include ensuring adequate levels of the drug in the body by increasing the dose or giving it intravenously, or combining it with other antiviral drugs, he says.
De Jong says avian-type cell receptors being mostly in the lower respiratory tract could explain why bird flu does not spread among humans, as reported in the journal Nature recently.
This may explain why viral load seems higher in the throat than nose, and why all infected developed pneumonia, he says.

Cockroaches make decisions as a group, new research shows
Cockroaches govern themselves in a very simple democracy where each insect has equal standing and group consultations precede decisions that affect the entire group, indicates a new study. 
The research determines that cockroach decision-making follows a predictable pattern that could explain group dynamics of other insects and animals, such as ants, spiders, fish and even cows. 
Cockroaches are silent creatures, save perhaps for the sound of them scurrying over a countertop. They must therefore communicate without vocalising. 
"Cockroaches use chemical and tactile communication with each other," says Dr Jos&eacute; Halloy, who co-authored the research in the current Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 
"They can also use vision," says Halloy, a scientist in the Department of Social Ecology at the Free University of Brussels in Belgium.
"When they encounter each other they recognise if they belong to the same colony thanks to their antennae that are 'nooses', that is, sophisticated olfactory organs that are very sensitive," he says.
Give me shelter
Halloy tested cockroach group behaviour by placing the insects in a dish that contained three shelters. The test was to see how the cockroaches would divide themselves into the shelters. 
After much "consultation", through antenna probing, touching and more, the cockroaches divided themselves up perfectly.
For example, if 50 insects were placed in a dish with three shelters, each with a capacity for 40 bugs, 25 roaches huddled together in the first shelter, 25 gathered in the second shelter, and the third was left vacant. 
When the researchers altered this set-up so that it had three shelters with a capacity for more than 50 insects, all the cockroaches moved into the first "house". 
A delicate balance
Halloy and his colleagues found that a balance existed between cooperation and competition for resources. 
"Cockroaches are gregarious insects [that] benefit from living in groups. It increases their reproductive opportunities, [promotes] sharing of resources like shelter or food, prevents desiccation by aggregating more in dry environments, etc," he says.
"So what we show is that these behavioural models allow them to optimise group size."
The models are so predictable that they could explain other insect and animal group behaviours, such as how some fish and bugs divide themselves up so neatly into subgroups, and how certain herding animals make simple decisions that do not involve leadership. 
Important research
Dr David Sumpter, a University of Oxford zoologist, says the new study "is an excellent paper" and "important". 
"It looks both at the mechanisms underlying decision-making by animals and how those mechanisms produce a distribution of animals amongst resource sites that optimises their individual fitness," he says.
"Much previous research has concentrated on either mechanisms or optimality at the expense of the other." 
For cockroaches, it seems, cooperation comes naturally.

Professor Frederick Short retrieving marked plants from Australia's Great Barrier Reef
Seagrasses around the world are in decline, according to a global study that says human impact is largely to blame.
But Australia's 'underwater forests' in Queensland have bucked the trend and are generally in good shape, the researchers find.
Seagrass beds are shallow water ecosystems, like a forest on the ocean floor.
Not only do they serve as protective nurseries for juvenile fish and shellfish, and a habitat and feeding ground for many marine species, they protect the coastline from currents and weather-related erosion. 
Since 2001, the University of New Hampshire's Professor Frederick Short and colleagues have been running the global monitoring program SeagrassNet.
This has involved monitoring seagrass health at 45 sites in 17 countries worldwide, including Australia.
In general, the researchers found a decline in seagrass around the world.
While they have not ruled out globate climate change as a factor, they believe human impact is mainly to blame.
For example, at a state park in Malaysia researchers discovered that seagrass decline was due to on-shore logging.
This had increased the level of water-borne sediments, thus decreasing light reaching the bottom where seagrasses grow. 
When seagrass beds disappear, the impact is major. For example, a disease outbreak in the 1930s wiped out 90% of eelgrass in the North Atlantic.
As a result, the scallop fishery in the mid-Atlantic disappeared and never really recovered.
The scientists are also monitoring seagrass beds in Thailand, home to shellfish, to see the effects of the 2004 tsunami.
Healthy pockets
Rob Coles, principal scientist with Queensland's Department of Primary Industries and Fisheries, based at the Northern Fisheries Centre, Cairns, led the Australian arm of the research.
He says the good news is that seagrass beds off Green Island, 25 kilometres east of Cairns, are very healthy.
And so are seagrasses he and his colleague monitor in 50 sites across Queensland as part of the Seagrass Watch initiative.
He puts that down to low population density, good light, clean water and comprehensive water management and conservation programs.
"In fact, there is no real loss of seagrass in the Great Barrier Reef World Heritage Area that we really know about. There have been temporary losses due to storm damage and we've had a big loss in Hervey Bay due to cyclone damage, [and declines in some areas of the Whitsundays], but generally [it's good]," he says.
"But that's not to say there is no cause for concern because increasingly people are moving to the coast and that will eventually impact on shallow water seagrasses. So we must [remain vigilant]."

All writing systems contain key shapes like T and X that are based on nature, researchers say
When you pick up a pen and write you're not simply scratching down a set of abstract marks, but representing the trees, mountains and horizons that surrounded your forebears, according to new research.
The research, which will be published in next month's issue of The American Naturalist, looked at more than 100 writing systems throughout history.
It concludes that all letters, and symbols like trademarks, share universal shapes and forms based on patterns found in nature.
"These classes of human visual signs possess a similar signature in their configuration suggesting that there are underlying principles governing the shapes of human visual signs," the team from the California Institute of Technology writes.
The researchers say their work provides evidence that we select our visual signs to match the contours of natural scenes.
This is because we have evolved to be good at visually processing these forms, the researchers say, and the shapes we use in writing are chosen for visual recognition at the cost of manual efficiency.
In other words, we use the letters we do because they are easy to read, although they mightn't be the most efficient shapes to write.
This is in contrast to shorthand, where forms are selected for speed and efficiency of writing at the cost of speedy reading.
L, T or X
Dr Mia Stephens from the University of South Australia, a lecturer in linguistics, text, language and society, says the researchers reduced written languages to a set of basic shapes, including T, L and X.
"They've organised and categorised all the different shapes and looked at the frequency and distribution of the shapes and there's a pattern," she says.
"[They say] you can detect similarities of human writing systems and [the shapes are] topographical, so you can stretch them, and squeeze them and muck around with them but they've still got basically the same number of links and junctions," she says.
The researchers also provide three sets of natural scenes from tribal, rural and urban surroundings to show how these forms are present in our surroundings.
But Stephens says the premise of the article is too simplistic.
She questions the primary evolutionary impulse of looking at scenery and imagines what our forebears would have thought at the time.
"We have to eat, we have to run away from predators, and we've evolved to do those things, not just look at scenery as scenery."
Stephens also says the nature of written language is likely to change in future, leaving the theory obsolete.
"This argument is about the past, and the future of writing is going to be completely different because we've now got keyboards," she says.

Researchers have grown artificial bladders from patients' own cells that seem to work when transplanted into the body. But no-one knows how safe the procedure is in the long term, says one commentator
Custom-made bladders grown from patients' own cells have been successfully transplanted and work, in some cases for years, scientists report. 
Writing in The Lancet journal, they describe the cases of seven patients who had new bladders engineered from a plug of tissue grown from their own dysfunctional bladders. 
"We have shown that regenerative medicine techniques can be used to generate functional bladders that are durable," says Dr Anthony Atala of Wake Forest University in North Carolina, who led the research. 
"This suggests that regenerative medicine may one day be a solution to the shortage of donor organs for those needing transplants." 
Patients given transplants of bladders made from their own cells would not need to take drugs to prevent organ rejection, as do patients given transplants from either living or dead donors. 
Atala's team worked with immature cells known as progenitor cells from the patients' bladders.
The researchers have been working for 16 years to find ways to first identify and separate these cells, then to coax them into growing on a scaffold into the two main cell types found in bladders. 
The patients were children and teens aged 4 to 19 who had poor bladder function because of a congenital birth defect that causes incomplete closure of the spine. 
Their bladders are too stiff and can cause pressure on the kidneys that eventually damages them. Such patients often get bladders reconstructed from the intestines, but the procedure is imperfect. 
Atala, a urinary surgeon and an expert in regenerative and stem cell science, wanted to try to grow replacement bladders for the patients. 
Measuring for a match
"We do a three-dimensional CT scan, a computerised imaging analysis, and we figure out what the bladder shape should look like," Atala says.
"We then take a small biopsy of their bladder, about half the size of a postage stamp." 
The researchers then separate the muscle cells on the outside of the bladder, and the specialised cells that line the bag-like organ. 
Then they create an artificial scaffold on which to layer the cells. The cells are grown in special compounds that nurture the progenitor cells and allow unwanted cells to die out. 
The resulting cells are then layered onto the scaffold and incubated until they grow and spread. 
"It is very much like baking a layer cake," Atala says. "You are placing these cells on one layer at a time." 
Atala works with stem cells, the body's master cells, but in this case, his team made use of progenitor cells, which are slightly further along the pathway from a 'blank slate' master cell. 
Organ factory
His team is also working to create blood vessels, kidneys, pancreases, hearts, livers and nerves. 
The technology has been licensed from Atala's former employer, the Children's Hospital in Boston, to a new company called Tengion created to take advantage of Atala's work. 
The new bladder technology has not yet been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for widespread use.
In a commentary, Dr Steve Chung, from the Advanced Urology Institute of Illinois, describes the work as a "milestone" that could especially help people  with cancer of the bladder, which is overwhelmingly caused by smoking. 
But he recommends putting the celebrations on hold until the technique has been tested by other teams, and over longer periods, to see whether it is safe as well as effective.

Are your hormone levels going up?
Just anticipating a good laugh is enough to increase the level of feelgood hormones in your blood, a conference has heard.
Previous work has shown that laughter triggers a cascade of beneficial physiological changes.
But researchers presenting a new study at the Experimental Biology 2006 conference in the US recently say they've now shown that merely anticipating "mirthful laughter" before watching a funny video has significant neuroendocrine effects. 
Professor Lee Berk of Loma Linda University in California says people who were just about to watch their favourite funny video had 27% more beta endorphins and 87% more human growth hormone (HGH) than those who were told they'd be reading magazines for an hour.
"We believe that results suggest that the anticipation of a laughter event initiates changes in neuroendocrine response prior to the onset of the event itself," he says.
Beta endorphins provide natural pain relief and low levels are associated with depression.
HGH is involved in growth, development and cell maintenance and some research suggests it plays a role in maintaining a healthy immune system.
Gags or mags?
Berk describes these effects as "the biology of hope", and says they are linked to the anticipation of a positive mood state.
In the study 16 people where asked to choose their favourite funny video. 
They were told three days before the experiment whether they would get to watch their video or sit in a "neutral room" and thumb through a pile of magazines.
Their blood hormone levels were tested just before the video was turned on, four times during an hour of video watching or magazine reading and three times afterwards.
Berk says the hormone levels stayed high throughout the video and afterwards.
Anticipation can be powerful
Professor Nicholas Keks of Monash University, an Australian researcher whose expertise includes hormones in psychiatry, says anticipation is a powerful emotion in terms of triggering physiological and emotional responses.
"Anticipation is a huge issue in areas that affect our psychology, whether it be anticipation of pleasurable activities or a bit of pain," he says.
"You just have to look at the classic example of salivation before food, or expectation of sexual activity I think laughter belongs in that group."
He says the physiological changes shown in the study are probably linked to the so-called "flight or fight" response of nervous system arousal.
"Part of laughter is a general arousal and what that will do is stimulate various hormonal and autonomic systems which go along with arousal," he says.
Berk says he next wants to study cytokine and inflammatory immune responses to the anticipation of laughter.

Astronomers found the methanol cloud in the W3(OH) region of the Milky Way, where stars form
Astronomers say they have spotted a cloud of alcohol in space that measures 463 billion kilometres across, a finding that could shed light on how giant stars are formed from primordial gas.
The vast bridge-shaped cloud of methanol has been spotted in a region of the Milky Way called W3(OH), where stars form by the gravitational collapse of concentrations of gas and dust. 
Researchers led by Dr Lisa Harvey-Smith spotted the cloud from the UK's Jodrell Bank Observatory.
They present their findings today at a meeting of the UK's Royal Astronomical Society in Leicester. 
The researchers have revealed giant filaments of gas by detecting masers.
These are like lasers. But rather than emitting beams of light, masers emit beams of microwave radiation, which the molecules in the gas cloud amplify millions of times.
The largest of the maser filaments, which were detected using the Merlin radio telescope, was 463 billion kilometres long.
The researchers say the entire gas cloud seems to be rotating as a disc around a central star, just like accretion discs in which planets form around young stars.
Harvey-Smith says the discovery is surprising as until now researchers had thought of masers as point-like objects or very small bright hotspots surrounded by fainter halos.
In 2004, astronomers spotted methanol for the first time in one of the disc-like clusters that form around nascent stars. 
That discovery opened up a new area of debate in astrophysics, challenging the conventional view that interstellar chemistry could not provide the conditions for creating complex molecules.
Until then researchers thought the molecules would be ripped apart by ultraviolet radiation from stars and other tough conditions. 
Around 130 organic molecules have also been identified so far in space, fuelling speculation that these complex molecules may have helped to sow the seeds for life on the fledgling Earth.

The 2004 Boxing Day tsunami destroyed the forest that once grew along this Indian coastline
Mangroves and coastal forests offer little or no protection against tsunamis, says new research that debunks earlier findings.
Last year researchers studied 17 coastal villages in the Tamil Nadu region of India in the months after the 2004 Boxing Day tsunami.
They concluded that death rates were lower in villages fronted by mangroves.
But when researchers including those from the Australian Research Council's Centre of Excellence for Coral Reef Studies analysed the data they found a very different story.
"The most important determinants of the number of people that died [in the Tamil Nadu region] were the distance of the village from the coast and its height above sea level," says co-author and Australian marine ecologist Dr Andrew Baird.
"In effect, there was no protective function of these coastal forests."
Baird says while the hypothesis of the original research was reasonable, it was not borne out by their findings, published in the April issue of the journal Estuarine and Coastal Shelf Science.
Their analysis revealed that the distance of a village from the coast and the height of the village above sea level explained 87% of the variation in mortality among villages.
Once these two variables were taken into account, vegetation area seemed to account for less than 1% of the variation.
"Mangroves and intact coastal ecosystems are wonderful and necessary things but they won't protect you from tsunamis," Baird says.
"We're concerned that by telling people that mangroves and coastal forest will protect them from a tsunami will give [people] a false sense of security.
"When the next wave comes people may be misled into thinking that they are safe because their village is fronted by a mangrove forest.
"The other concern is that the concept of 'green belts' and buffer zones is being used as an excuse by the tourism industry and other interests such as plantation owners to move people away from their homes and livelihoods and take this land from them."
Baird says people would be better to concentrate on early-warning systems and effective evaluation strategies in the event of another tsunami.
"That's the way you're going to save lives," he says.
Researchers from the University of Guam and the Wildlife Conservation Society-Indonesia Program were also involved in the new analysis.

Will the Venus Express mission yield new insights into what awaits Earth?
A space probe that arrives at Venus today will yield new insights into what caused the runaway greenhouse effect there and could bring a salutary warning for our own planet, scientists say.
The European Space Agency's Venus Express will spend three years peering through a shroud of toxic sulfur clouds to glean information about the climate, atmosphere and curious 'backwards' rotation of the so-called pressure cooker planet.
It's also hoped the mission will help answer questions about what caused its mysterious 'resurfacing' some 500 million years ago and whether it is being shaken by seismic activity and volcanoes.
It may also provide clues about whether the Earth and Venus were once similar, and when and why they took such radically different paths, says Dr Frank Mills of the Australian National University, an expert in the chemistry of the Venusian atmosphere who has been working with scientists directly involved in the mission.
"There are many uncertainties in trying to reconstruct Venus' evolution," he says.
"Some of these may be resolvable by making appropriate observations."
The greenhouse effect
The UK's Royal Astronomical Society says "any astronaut unlucky enough to land [on Venus] would be simultaneously crushed, roasted, choked and dissolved".
Venus' atmosphere is 90 times denser than Earth's and 96% is made up of the greenhouse gas CO2.
Scientists say this causes a strong warming effect and heats the surface of the planet to around 500&deg;C.
There are no signs of water on Venus and its surface is apparently more arid that the driest desert on Earth.
Associate director of the Australian Centre for Astrobiology at Macquarie University Dr Jeremy Bailey says isotope ratios in the atmosphere suggest that Venus once had oceans that have since evaporated.
Dr John Lattanzio, from Australia's Centre for Stellar and Planetary Astrophysics at Monash University, says that unlike Earth, Venus lacks a CO2 cycle.
On Earth, this cycle means the CO2 gets locked into water and rock and comes back out through volcanic activity, he says.
"So at any given time [on Earth] there's a lot of CO2 that's out of the atmosphere and it self-regulates," he says.
"Venus doesn't have a CO2 cycle because there aren't any oceans."
Mills says the probe may also help explain whether the CO2 on Venus is produced by a catalytic reaction.
He says the probe will also shed more light on the general processes by which atmospheric "greenhouses" work.
"Venus' atmospheric greenhouse has both similarities to and differences from Earth's," he says, and data from this mission will allow scientists to compare the two.
A mirror to our own future?
Bailey says learning more about Venus will help us understand where our own planet is headed.
But he doesn't believe "anything like Venus will result from the amount of CO2 we're currently putting into the atmosphere".
Rather, the Earth may end up like Venus over billions of years because of the increasing brightness of the Sun.
"In about a million years it will have increased by about 10% and it's estimated that will be enough to trigger the sorts of changes that have happened in Venus," he says.
Mills says that Venus teaches us not to take for granted that the climate on Earth will always be benign and support life.
"Research on how Venus may have evolved, what its carbon cycle is like and how volcanic activity may influence climate helps in understanding what is possible for a planet," he says.
NASA's Deep Space Network, including the Canberra Deep Space Communication Complex, has been tracking Venus Express.
Venus Express is due to end its 400 million kilometre, five month journey around 5.30 pm AEST (07:30 UTC) today.
For more information including updates and podcasts go to the ESA Venus Express website.

Unique conditions at the Sea of Galilee, or Lake Kinneret as it's also known, may have caused a patch of ice to form near its western shore, says an oceanographer
The New Testament says that Jesus walked on water, but a US professor says there could be a less miraculous explanation - he walked on a floating piece of ice.
Professor Doron Nof, a professor of oceanography at Florida State University, says his study found an unusual combination of water and atmospheric conditions could have led to ice formation on the Sea of Galilee.
He and his co-authors describe the local freezing phenomenon as "springs ice".
Nof used palaeoceanographic records of the Mediterranean Sea's surface temperatures and statistical models to examine the dynamics of the Sea of Galilee, which Israelis know now as Lake Kinneret. 
The study, published in the April issue of the Journal of Paleolimnology, found that a period of cooler temperatures in the area between 1500 and 2600 years ago could have included the decades in which Jesus lived.
A drop in temperature below freezing could have caused ice thick enough to support a human form on the surface of the freshwater lake near the western shore, Nof says.
This is an area where the researchers say many archaeological findings relating to Jesus have been found.
It might have been nearly impossible for distant observers to see a piece of floating ice surrounded by water. 
Nof says he offers his study as a "possible explanation" for Jesus' walk on water.
"If you ask me if I believe someone walked on water, no, I don't," Nof says.
"Maybe somebody walked on the ice, I don't know. I believe that something natural was there that explains it.
"We leave to others the question of whether or not our research explains the biblical account." 
Nof says the chance of similar icy conditions in northern Israel today is "effectively zero, or about once in more than 10,000 years".
When Nof offered his theory 14 years ago that wind and sea conditions could explain the parting of the Red Sea, Nof says he received some hate mail, even though he noted that the idea could support the biblical description of the event. 
And as his theory of Jesus' walk on ice began to circulate, he had more hate mail in his email inbox. 
"They asked me if I'm going to try next to explain the resurrection," he says.

If you catch bird flu then shop at your local market, the stallholder might need antiviral drugs as well as you
Giving antiviral drugs both as treatment to infected people and as prophylaxis to their close contacts provides the best chance of minimising the impact of a bird flu pandemic, new research suggests.
The Australian study found targeted prophylaxis would delay the onset of a pandemic, buying time to hopefully develop and distribute a vaccine.
But a treatment-based strategy would not significantly delay the onset of the disease or reduce the attack rate, the federal government-funded study found.
The study, by Dr James McCaw and Dr Jodie McVernon from the University of Melbourne, may be considered by health authorities if avian influenza A (H5N1) reaches Australia.
McCaw, a theoretical physicist, and McVernon, a paediatrician and research fellow, used a mathematical model to determine the optimal use of Australia's stockpile of 4 million doses of antiviral drugs during a pandemic.
The model examines differences between using antivirals as treatment once a person has bird flu to reduce their chance of dying and of transmission, and using drugs as post-exposure prophylaxis for those who have come into contact with an infectious person.
"The model says every time a new person becomes ill, 20 contacts need to be tracked down and given antivirals," McCaw told the Australasian Society of Infectious Diseases annual scientific meeting in New Zealand this week.
"Research indicates that on average the typical person will have 20 close contacts with people over a few days, 85% being relatives, friends and work colleagues and 15% being others such as shopkeepers and the bus driver."
The researchers defined a close contact as someone who had a two-way conversation within a metre of an infected person.
Mild or catastrophic?
Authorities won't know whether a pandemic will be mild or catastrophic until it hits, McCaw says.
The model indicates that if mild, treatment of those infected will reduce the number of people who become ill and slow transmission, and prophylaxis will delay the pandemic by several months, buying time to develop a vaccine.
"For a severe pandemic, the model shows that treatment fails to reduce the overall number of people becoming sick. It has benefits on an individual level by presumably reducing an individual's mortality but not at a population level," McCaw says.
"But prophylaxis continues to work by delaying exposure."
The federal Department of Health and Ageing and the National Health and Medical Research Council have contributed to this research as part of pandemic preparedness planning.

Many chickens have been culled to stop the spread of bird flu but experts say the next human flu pandemic is just as likely to come from elsewhere
Birds are not the only source of viruses that could become the next flu pandemic, say two Australian virus experts, who argue the 1918 Spanish flu virus came from mammals, not birds, as recently suggested.
And the researchers call for greater surveillance of flu viruses already in people or in other mammals such as pigs or cats.
Dr Mark Gibbs of the Australian National University and retired virologist Professor Adrian Gibbs report their argument today in the journal Nature.
"There's a huge focus on birds and that is good but we need to extend the surveillance," says Mark Gibbs.
In October last year, a team led by Dr Jeffrey Taubenberger of the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology in the US, reported in Nature that the Spanish flu virus, which killed millions around the world in 1918-1919, was a bird virus that leapt the species barrier into humans.
The researchers said RNA material from the 1918 virus, obtained from preserved tissue of victims of the pandemic, showed it was similar to bird viruses, including the deadly H5N1 strain, that is of such concern today.
Taubenberger and team also said their argument was supported by family trees constructed by comparing particular 1918 virus genes with equivalent genes from a broad range of viruses that have been found in other animals.
But Gibbs disagrees with Taubenberger's interpretation of his own virus family trees.
He says while it is true that the 1918 H1N1 strain originated in birds in the distant past, the question is when?
Recombination in mammals?
Taubenberger argues the 1918 virus came directly from birds without combining with viruses in other animals first.
But Gibbs says the family trees show the 1918 virus evolved from a virus that had already been in mammals for some time.
He says the fact that you get a different family tree depending on the virus gene used to construct it supports the idea that the 1918 virus was a result of virus recombination in animals like pigs, horses or cats.
Gibbs also says the virus may have been in humans 50 or 60 years before the pandemic, as suggested by studies showing some elderly people had immunity to the 1918 flu. 
He suspects it is a coincidence that the 1918 and bird flu viruses Taubenberger studied were so similar, citing a phenomenon known as parallel evolution.
"Wings have evolved in insects, birds, mammals and reptiles," he says. "But they haven't evolved from a common ancestor with wings. They've evolved wings independently.
"This happens in flu as well. In fact it's probably very common in flu but not well understood."
Focus on birds
Gibbs says Taubenberger's linking of bird flu and the 1918 pandemic increased alarm about bird flu.
"[But] the notion that the threat from influenzas only comes from birds is actually quite wrong," he says.
"There is a reasonable chance that the next pandemic may come from an influenza virus which is already in people or in pigs or in some other mammal," he says.
Gibbs says it is important to know what really happened in the 1918 pandemic because it was one of the most serious disease outbreaks in history.

This fishy creature, which was up to 3 metres long, walked on land with fins that have arm-like bones
Fossils of a 375 million year old species of ancient fish fill an evolutionary gap in the transition between water and land animals, scientists say. 
Remains of the new species named Tiktaalik roseae were found encased in frozen rock north of the Arctic Circle.
It has the fins and scales of a fish but its crocodile-like skull, neck and ribs resemble those of a land animal. 
"It is a fish that shows a surprising combination of characteristics of land-living animals," says Professor Neil Shubin, of the University of Chicago who's team publishes its discovery in today's issue of the journal Nature.
"This animal represents the transition from water to land - the part that includes ourselves," he says.
The nearly complete and very well-preserved specimens show the creature had sharp teeth, a jaw from 25 to 51 centimetres across and a flattened body that could reach 3 metres in length. 
"It shows us the stages by which land-living animals were constructed," Shubin says.
Blizzards and bears
The scientists battled freezing temperatures and blustery storms to get to the site on the remote Ellesmere Island more than 966 kilometres north of the Arctic Circle in Canada.
They also faced the threat of polar bears during their search for so-called elpistostegid fish, which are thought to be most closely related to tetrapods, land animals with limbs such as amphibians, reptiles, birds and humans. 
"Previous fossils representing this evolutionary event have really been fish with a few land characteristics, or land vertebrates with a few residual fish characteristics," says Dr Andrew Milner, of the Natural History Museum in London.
"These fossils show an animal that sits bang in the middle between the fish and land animals." 
What is generating the most excitement are joints in the fish's pectoral fins, which have bones that compare to the upper arm, forearm and primitive parts of the hand of land-living animals.
"Most of the major joints of the fin are functional in this fish," says Shubin.
"The shoulder, elbow and even parts of the wrist are already there and working in ways similar to the earliest land-living animals." 
The fossils also indicate that the transition from water to land occurred gradually in fish living in shallow water. They gradually developed features to live on land over time. 
Once was balmy
The sediment in which Tiktaalik was found has been dated to around 375 million years ago, in the swampy primeval era known as the Devonian. 
At that time, what is now frigid Arctic Canada had a balmy, sub-tropical climate, for it was part of a mega-continent that straddled the equator. 
Shubin believes that Tiktaalik's size and shape indicates that it was fitted for living in small streams in a delta system, an environment that probably encouraged the fish to venture into shallow water or even make forays onto land in search of food or shelter from predators. 
"The skeleton of Tiktaalik indicates that it could support its body under the force of gravity, whether in very shallow water or on land," says co-author Professor Farish Jenkins of Harvard University. 
"This represents a critical early phase in the evolution of all limbed animals, including humans - albeit a very ancient step." 
In a commentary in Nature, evolutionary biologists Professor Per Erik Ahlberg of Sweden's Uppsala University and Dr Jennifer Clack of the University of Cambridge hail the find as being quite literally ground-breaking.
The newly-discovered species owes its name to the Elders Council of Nunavut, which was invited by the scientists to propose a formal name. 
Tiktaalik, pronounced tic-TA-lick, is the word in the Inuktikuk language for "a large, shallow-water fish".

The test drug triggered a powerful immune response, leaving six trial participants seriously ill. But experts are still puzzled about what exactly happened and why animal studies gave no clue to this possible side-effect
An investigation into a UK drug trial that left six men seriously ill has found no evidence to suggest there was anything wrong with the drug or the way the tests were run, a regulatory body says.
In an interim report, the Medicines Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency says the problem appears to be due to an unprecedented biological reaction to the drug in humans that had not been seen previously in animal tests.
"Our main conclusion is that there was a powerful pharmacological action of this drug in man which was not detectable in the pre-clinical studies done in the non-human primate species, even in far higher doses," says the agency's chief executive Professor Kent Woods. 
The drug had previously been tested on rabbits and monkeys. 
As a consequence, the agency will not authorise any trials for similar drugs without taking external, expert advice. 
"This does not mean a standstill on such research but we feel that we need additional expert advice in certain areas relating to the authorisation of those studies," Woods says.
UK health secretary Patricia Hewitt also agreed to set up a group of international experts to examine the issue further. 
Trial by trial
Six men were left seriously ill at a hospital in north London on 13 March after taking part in the clinical study to test the drug TGN 1412, designed to treat chronic inflammatory conditions and leukaemia. 
Of the six, five have left hospital and one is making a good recovery. In the days after the trial, two of the men were described as critically ill with organ failure. 
The trial was run by US drug research company Parexel International Corp on behalf of German company TeGenero AG. 
At the time, Parexel said it had operated within regulatory guidelines and TeGenero said the response did not reflect the results obtained from initial laboratory studies.
Monoclonal antibodies 
TGN 1412 belongs to a class of drugs known as monoclonal antibodies, which specifically bind to target molecules. TGN 1412 targets and activates an immune system protein called CD28. 
"This is a complex scientific issue which raises important scientific and medical questions about the potential risks associated with this type of drug and how to make the transition from pre-clinical testing to trials in humans," the report says. 
The regulatory agency will now seek expert, external advice for any future phase one trials, when drugs are first tested on humans, involving monoclonal antibodies or other novel molecules targeting the immune system. 
Woods says it is vital that they learn lessons from the trial, which he describes as a "wholly exceptional occurrence". 
David Webb, professor of clinical pharmacology at the University of Edinburgh, says the report's findings could result in a change to the design of first phase trials for monoclonal antibodies. 
"One obvious difference might be to dose subjects sequentially rather than at the same time, which at the very least would minimise the number of subjects put at risk," he says.

A new form of silicon is said to be easier and cheaper to make than traditional silicon, yet works just as well. But will it be good enough for future generations of computer chips?
Japanese researchers have made a liquid form of silicon they say might one day be sprayed onto chips with an inkjet printer.
A team led by Masahiro Furusawa of Japan's Seiko Epson Corporation, says the new form of silicon is easier and cheaper to make than conventional silicon, yet works just as well.
The researchers report their work today in the journal Nature. 
The new form of silicon comprises cyclopentasiline, a silicon-based polymer that comprises five silicon atoms joined in a ring and is liquid at room temperature. 
Ultraviolet light is used to break open the bonds of some of the rings and let the molecules reform into long, placid chains that behave like viscous oil. 
The mixture is then diluted with a solvent like toluene, and is so fluid that it can be coated onto a surface by spinning, or even sprayed by an inkjet printer. 
The resultant liquid film is then baked at around 500&deg;C to turn it into a hard mosaic of flat silicon crystals whose semiconductor qualities are as good as the ultrapure slabs made by conventional refining, the researchers say.
In a review of the work in Nature, Associate Professor Lisa Rosenberg, a Canadian chemist at the University of Victoria in British Columbia, says the new  process has some drawbacks, as it still has to rigorously exclude air and water.
But she says the ability to make silicon film by inkjet is a clear breakthrough. 
"[It] will not provide the resolution necessary to pattern a high-density integrated circuit and therefore make a computer chip," she says. 
"But what it will certainly allow is the remarkably straightforward generation of simple, cheap and flexible circuits for displays, as well as a range of other applications - solar cells, x-ray detections and multi-analyte chemical sensor included."
Has silicon had its chips?
Analysts have long predicted the demise of silicon as a chip component due to the costs of purifying and processing it.
This usually entails taking highly purified natural silicon, which occurs in the mineral silica, and heating it in a vacuum to create a mist of free silicon atoms that then condenses onto a surface. 
This refining requires conditions to be ultra-clean, as an intruding speck of dust or thimbleful of unwanted gas molecules can ruin the outcome.
The complexity and cost have led to research into alternatives to silicon.
The Japanese team's method doesn't need high vacuums, high temperatures or ultra-clean environments.

It's possible to create order by introducing disorder, say researchers who have been working with computer models of swinging pendulums
Physicists have surprised their colleagues by turning chaos into order.
US physicists report how a network of interconnected pendulums can be made to swing in sync by being pushed at random times.
Sebastian Brandt and team at the Washington University in St Louis report their findings in the journal Physical Review Letters.
The researchers constructed a computer model of an interconnected network of pendulums that swing out of sync when they are pushed at the same time.
But when the pendulums are pushed at random, they swing in an ordered and synchronised way, the researchers report.
"The thing that is counterintuitive is that when you introduce disorder into the system - when the [forces on the pendulums] act at random - the chaos that was present before disappears and there is order," says Brandt.
The researchers say there is much to learn about the role of disorder in complex systems and suggest their work might be relevant to understanding synchronisation of neural activity in the central nervous system.
Their model system and neurones are both nonlinear, which means that there is no linear relationship between the amount of force applied and the response.
"When you hear your favourite music twice as loud you don't double the pleasure," says Brandt, explaining how one aspect of the brain, hearing, is nonlinear.
"This is of course basic research," he says. "But what you can learn from this is that complex systems sometimes behave in a very unexpected way, completely opposite to your intuition or expectation."
Surprising
Australian physicist Professor Joe Wolfe of the University of New South Wales says the findings are a surprise although not "counterintuitive".
"It's not really counterintuitive because one's intuition doesn't really work for such systems because they're complicated," he says. "Our intuition is good for dealing with simple things rather than complicated things."
Wolfe also says the research only has limited applications because the researchers used calculations with specific numbers rather than solving equations made up of symbols such as x and y.
This means they do not have a solution that can be used to understand every possible case, he says.
Inspiring a new theory?
Wolfe says ideally the findings would inspire someone to come up with a general theory to understand what was going on, but he says it is very hard to find mathematical solutions to complicated nonlinear systems.
And he thinks the idea that the research could help understand neurones is "drawing a long bow".
"A system of neurones is also a system of nonlinear things that interact in a way that you don't understand and produce sometimes surprising results," says Wolfe.
"I wouldn't say it's terribly relevant. It's just an interesting observation."

Penguins 60 million years old are closely related to today's yellow-eyed penguin, new DNA analysis suggests
New analysis of the world's oldest fossil penguins confirms some birds survived the mass extinction that killed the dinosaurs 65 million years ago, researchers say.
The penguins once lived in shallow seas off New Zealand's east coast 60 million years ago.
Now a molecular study, published in the journal Molecular Biology and Evolution, links them closely to modern penguins.
Co-author Associate Professor Ewan Fordyce from the University of Otago says penguins are specialised birds that evolved much later than other species.
"The fact that they have been found within a few million years of the dinosaurs' extinction is compelling evidence that modern birds must have evolved earlier and diversified during the time of the dinosaurs," he says.
"It also suggests that many of those bird lineages survived the catastrophe that wiped out the dinosaurs, so it's unlikely that there was a big turnover, with modern birds only emerging after the mass extinction."  
The study incorporates genetic evidence of the evolutionary relationships between penguins' distant cousins like shearwaters, albatrosses, ducks and moas.
The researchers used DNA from these birds to provide a broad framework of family relationships which, together with the fossil evidence, is used to predict when those birds must have arisen.
"We're really confident we have ancient birds and really confident about the date," says Fordyce.
"It's enabled us to establish an earlier timeframe for when groups of modern birds branched out."
Most of the New Zealand fossils, officially recognised as the Waimanu penguin genus, were discovered by amateur palaeontologist Al Mannering in the Waipara region just north of Christchurch.
Some 60 million years ago New Zealand had already separate from Australia and Antarctica and was a low-lying land mass much closer to the South Pole. 
Waimanu manneringi would have developed in a polar habitat similar to today's yellow-eyed penguin, which it closely resembles.
Its long bill and condensed wing bones indicate that it would be quite at home eating and swimming in today's Antarctica, the researchers say.

Ant from the genus Ectatomma foraging at the Project Amazonas field station in Peru
Ants evolved far earlier than previously believed, as far back as 140 million to 168 million years ago, US researchers report.
And these insects have plants to thank for their diversity, the Harvard University team reports today in the journal Science. 
The researchers used a genetic clock to reconstruct the history of ants and found the ant family first arose more than 40 million years earlier than previously thought.
But ants did not diversify into different genera and species until flowering plants came onto the scene, the researchers conclude.
The study sheds light on one of the most important and numerous animals, which includes hundreds of different species. 
"We estimate that ant diversification took off approximately 100 million years ago, along with the rise of flowering plants, the angiosperms," says team leader Professor Naomi Pierce.
"These plants provided ants with new habitats both in the forest canopy and in the more complex leaf litter on the forest floor, and the herbivorous insects that evolved alongside flowering plants provided food for ants." 
The researchers reconstructed the ant family tree using DNA sequencing of six genes from 139 ant genera, encompassing 19 of 20 ant subfamilies around the world. 
Such molecular clocks are widely used, alongside fossil and other evidence, to determine how old species are. They work on the basis that DNA mutates at a steady and calculable rate. 
The researchers found that the poorly known ant subfamily Leptanillinae is the most ancient, followed by two broad groups known as the poneroids, or predatory hunting ants, and the formicoids, the more familiar species such as pavement ants and carpenter ants.

The outer rings of Saturn (top) and Uranus (bottom), in which each system has been scaled to a common planetary radius
The newly discovered outer ring of Uranus is bright blue, for the same reason the Earth's sky is blue, astronomers say.
It's made up of tiny particles.
The ring is "strikingly similar" to Saturn's outer ring, which astronomers last month confirmed was probably generated by one of the planet's moons, Enceladus.
Like Saturn's ring, the Uranus ring also has a small moon in it, called Mab. But Mab is too small and too cold to be spewing a geyser of ice that contributes to the ring as Enceladus is now believed to be doing. 
"The outer ring of Saturn is blue and has Enceladus right smack at its brightest spot, and Uranus is strikingly similar, with its blue ring right on top of Mab's orbit," says Imke de Pater, a professor of astronomy at the University of California Berkeley, who helped lead the study. 
"I think there is no chance that the blue ring is caused by geyser activity," adds de Pater, whose report is published today in the journal Science. 
"We don't know what the composition of the particles is." 
Mab is probably covered with water ice, like the other moons of Uranus, but that has nothing to do with the ring's colour, says de Pater. 
"They are blue because they are tiny particles," she says.
"That is same reason why the sky is blue. You have little particles that scatter light as blue light." 
Most other rings around planets in the solar system are red, because of the size of their particles. 
This is why astronomers missed Uranus's outer ring for so long; scientists were looking for it in the infrared light spectrum.
Throwing up debris
The scientists believe that meteoroids hitting Mab's surface throw up debris. The larger pieces remain in the moon's orbit and eventually are swept up, but smaller ones drift around more and eventually make up the ring. 
The blue ring was only seen after researchers compared notes from near-infrared observations by the Keck Telescope in Hawaii and visible-light photos taken by the orbiting Hubble Space Telescope. 
Now they are looking for rings around other planets, including Mars.
Rings are always easier to see when they are edge-on, de Pater says.
"The interesting thing with Uranus is that in 2007 the rings will appear edge-on," she says. "In 2007 the rings will be 100 times brighter." 
Saturn's rings
A second paper, published in Geophysical Research Letters, shows that Saturn's prominent A ring contains more debris than once thought. 
The Cassini-Huygens spacecraft now orbiting the planet has sent back ultraviolet images that show the ring is 35 times thicker than originally thought. 
A team at the University of Colorado at Boulder says the particles making up the ring range in size from dust grains to chunks as big as buses, and orbit in long stringy clumps. 
The same spacecraft helped planetary scientists discover the geyser on Enceladus, leading to speculation that the moon has a liquid water source under its frozen surface.

A new study shows we can only tolerate freeloaders for a short time. After that societies prefer to punish them
The idea of a happy, cooperative society in which no one gets punished falls apart as soon as a few freeloaders show up, a new study shows.
Although most volunteers in the study first chose to join a group that did not use punishment, most eventually left for a group that fined transgressors.
Researchers from the University of Erfurt in Germany and the London School of Economics report their findings today in the journal Science.
The study can help us understand how to make society work more smoothly and can help in designing policies aimed at ensuring cooperation, writes Assistant Professor Joseph Henrich, a US anthropologist at Emory University in Georgia, in a commentary.
"Even if nearly everyone is initially cooperative and contributes, free-riders can profit and proliferate, leading to the eventual collapse of cooperation," he writes.
For example, if most people in society are brave or conserve petrol, he explains, others benefit by evading military service or driving petrol-guzzling cars.
Playing games
In the study, researchers asked 84 students to join one of two groups to play a game with tokens. One group of players punished members who did not share freely, while the other group did not. 
The students could choose which group to join. 
"Each player is endowed with 20 money [tokens] and may contribute between 0 and 20 [tokens] to a public good," the researchers write.
"Each group member equally profits from the public good, independent of his or her own contribution." 
In the punishment group, members could choose to fine other members three tokens, but it cost them one of their own tokens to do so. 
Two-thirds of the students initially chose the group in which members could not punish others, but many abandoned that group when they saw those in the punishment group were prospering more. 
And former freeloaders were some of the most enthusiastic converts to the punishment mode, the researchers found. 
"You can't explain this dramatic change in behaviour by saying that people are just looking for the best pay-off. People gave up pay-off to follow the cooperative norm," says Erfurt researcher Dr Bettina Rockenbach. 
Punishing the freeloaders
Dr Bernd Irlenbusch of the London School of Economics adds he was surprised with the extent of punishment.
"I was surprised so many of the freeloaders exerted punishment on others when they entered the sanctioning institution," he says. 
When the game ended after 30 rounds, the people in the punishment group had donated an average 18 tokens per round.
Meanwhile the live-and-let-live group had almost no members and those who remained donated three tokens to the public good on average per round. 
Little actual punishment was applied during the later rounds of the game, apparently because the threat of punishment was enough to ensure cooperation, the researchers say.

A female Australian redback spider eating a male spider
Australian redback spiders sniff out how much competition they have for females as they're growing up, and tailor their adult size accordingly, say Canadian researchers.
Michael Kasumovic and Dr Maydianne Andrade of the University of Toronto report their findings in the latest issue of the journal Current Biology.
"Males are really tracking the selection pressures that they're facing in an environment. They're aware of male density and the amount of competition they're going to be facing," says Kasumovic.
Like most spiders, male redback spiders are much smaller than the females but they vary in size.
Kasumovic and Andrade have found that an individual spider's development is determined by a trade-off between traits that benefit a spider's sexual success versus their longer term survival.
"A trait that's good for sex is often not good for surviving and a trait that's very good for surviving may not be good for sex," says Australian spider expert, Dr Marie Herberstein, of Macquarie University in Sydney.
The classic example is the male peacock's tail, she says, which is good for attracting females but weighs him down and affects his chances of survival when being pursued by a predator.
She says Kasumovic and Andrade have found that when it comes to the redbacks, maturing early is good for their sexual success but maturing later is better for survival.
The study
Kasumovic and Andrade studied how immature male redbacks develop in the presence and absence of females. 
They found that when females are not around, the males develop into sexually mature adults slowly, growing into relatively large adults with lots of energy stores.
This gives the male spiders a higher chance of survival when they set out on their search for female mates, the researchers say.
But when male spiders are surrounded by females, they focus their energy on maturing quickly, ending up both smaller and leaner because they have spent less time foraging.
Kasumovic and Andrade say growing up fast gives the spiders the best chance of being first to mate with the nearby females, something that is important considering the sex life of redbacks.
Males redbacks only have one or two chances to mate before they are killed by the female, and mating is most successful when the female is a virgin.
"Everybody always states that the small males are a by-product of them not being able to get enough resources, but we're showing that they're intentionally developing that way," says Kasumovic.
Small and fat
The researchers found that when both females and males are around, male redbacks also grow up fast and small. But they have more fat stores on their body than when other males were not around.
The researchers suspect that this extra fat gives the males the endurance to compete with other males for the extended courtship rituals that females prefer.
Males are supposed to pluck and vibrate a female's web strings for up to eight hours in the hope of gaining their favour.
In the experiment, the males could not see or touch the females or males around them. This means the spiders were responding to pheromones, literally sniffing out their mates and potential competition.
A choice of strategy
Herberstein says the new research shows that male spiders choose which strategy to pursue depending on how they assess their environment as they're maturing.
"Through this developmental plasticity, the males can tailor their development depending on the situation they find themselves in," she says.

Playing violent video games can change the way you think, a study says
Playing violent video games can make you think other people are out to get you, research shows.
Dr Sonya Brady of the University of California, San Francisco, and Professor Karen Matthews at the University of Pittsburgh say their study shows that young men are more likely to see others' attitudes toward them as hostile if they've just played a violent game. 
"You're kind of on the lookout for other people being rude to you," Brady says. 
Brady and Matthews had a group of 100 male undergraduates aged 18 to 21 play one of two popular video games.
One game involved car theft and bashings and the second one pitted the player in a race to get homework to school on time.
In the non-violent game, players took the role of a parent and their task was to deliver their child's science project to school before it could be marked late.
In the violent game, players took the role of a criminal, and were instructed by the mafia to beat up a drug dealer with a baseball bat. 
Are you accusing me?
After playing the games, study participants watched a scenario in which a teacher tells a class he suspects some students have cheated in a test.
The teacher says he is very disappointed in those who have cheated but proud of those who did well. 
The teacher then asks to see "Billy" after class. 
The study participants were told to imagine themselves as Billy, and were asked how likely it was that the teacher was going to accuse them of cheating.
Students who'd played the violent game were more likely to think they'd be accused of cheating, the researchers report in the Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine. 
More likely to approve of marijuana
Brady says the study also shows young men are more likely to think it's acceptable to smoke marijuana and drink alcohol after playing a violent game.
She says this suggests that violent video games make players more likely to throw caution to the wind, whether it's with regard to their own health or any other type of risky behaviour.
"Parents have been told the message that violent video games and violent media in general can influence the likelihood that their kids will be aggressive," Brady says.
"What this study suggests is that they might increase any type of risk-taking behaviour."
Playing the violent game boosted young men's blood pressure, and appeared to have more of an effect on those who came from more violent homes or communities, the study says.
But regardless of whether they grew up in a violent environment, the young men who had played the violent game were less cooperative and more competitive in completing an assigned task with another person, compared to those who played the non-violent game.
The results show the potential for video games to change the way we think, Brady says.

A pump that extracts heat from sewage is being used to warm homes
Norwegians can now heat their homes and offices by flushing the toilet.
The sewage heat pump plant, which began operating last week, uses fridge technology to tap heat from raw sewage and direct it back to the country's capital Oslo.
Machines at the end of a 300 metre long tunnel in a hillside in central Oslo suck heat from the sewer and transfer it to a network of hot water pipes feeding thousands of radiators and taps in the city.
Similar systems have been used in other parts of the world but the Norwegians say theirs is the biggest.
"We believe this is the biggest heating system in the world using raw sewage," says Lars-Anders Loervik, managing director of Oslo energy company Viken Fjernvarme, which runs the plant. 
The pump uses a system of compressors and condensers and generates 18 megawatts, enough heat to warm 9000 flats or save 6000 tonnes of oil a year, he says. 
 Exploiting sewage
Untreated sewage from toilets, bathtubs, sinks and rainwater from the streets flows into the system at 9.6&deg;C and comes out at 5.7&deg;C after heat is extracted with a refrigerant. 
The energy goes to warming to about 90&deg;C the water in a 400 kilometre pipe system fed to offices and homes, from a temperature of 52&deg;C when it reaches the sewerage plant.
Industrial waste burning plants also heat the water.  
About a third of the heat energy comes from electricity driving the system and the other two-thirds is the heat from the sewer. 
Dr Monica Axell, head of the International Energy Agency's heat pump centre, says the concept could be a feasible solution for many cities as long as they have the necessary infrastructure.
The only problem with the system is that flow in the sewers tends to be irregular.
Monday mornings between 4am and 6am are especially dry in Oslo because residents go to bed early on Sunday.
But on weekends the flow is good, says project manager for the Oslo plant Oyvind Nilsen.
"When people have been out to parties there's a lot of beer going into the sewer," he says. 
Among other sewage energy projects worldwide, US scientists are looking to generate electricity from sewage-eating bacteria.
"The microbial fuel cell work is going well, but we still are not out of the lab on this technology," says Professor Bruce Logan of Pennsylvania State University.

More search results aren't the answer. We need targeted results, experts say
Google's new search engine technology won't solve all the problems of finding what you need but it's a small step in the right direction, information retrieval experts say.
The company has paid an undisclosed amount to license a new type of search algorithm, recently designed in Australia by University of New South Wales PhD student Ori Allon.
The search tool, Orion, has been touted as the biggest thing in searching the web since the development of the Google page rank algorithm by two Stanford University researchers in the early 1980s.
Little has been disclosed about the software because of commercial confidentiality.
But the man who worked with Allon to market his research says the system will make searching the net faster and easier.
"When you put in a query it comes up with a list of associated keywords that specify your search to a greater depth," says Andrew Stead, business development manager of the NewSouth Innovations, the commercial arm of the University of New South Wales.
"It actually goes into sites and extracts text so you can just scroll down a single page and derive the information you were looking for.
"Traditionally you've have to click through to the site, but this means you don't have to click through and find that the site's incorrect."
Luxury cars or football?
For example, a search for a particular model of luxury car comes up with where to buy one, a review of the car itself and an overview of the car manufacturer.
Stead says the search is best suited to information-based queries, such as the rules of Australian Rules football, rather than finding the home page of the Australian Football League.
But even Stead says it's not the end step in perfecting internet searches, which some research suggests cover as little as just 5% of the web.
 "Search has got a long way to go before it's going to give us what we want and this is one step in that path," he says.
Ranking pages
Dr Peter Bailey is project leader of the CSIRO's information retrieval project and has been involved in designing a search engine designed for use within organisations.
Like Stead, he says it appears that Allon's model has gone some way to addressing one of the biggest problems of searching the internet, which is how information is ranked.
Bailey says search engines work by trawling the net for documents on public websites.
The documents are then copied to form a sort of reverse index where words are linked to massive indexes of documents.
This is why the key to successful searching is ranking the material to reflect the needs of the searcher, he says.
Bailey we're still far from the perfect search engine, and current systems only address about 5% of the problems involved in trawling the web for information.
The Holy Grail of internet searching includes tailoring searches to individuals, accessing the whole internet and providing the perfect answer, something he says may be as elusive as it is desirable.

Graffiti is the modern equivalent of cave art, an expert says. Both are produced by young men with adrenaline and sex on their minds
Testosterone-fuelled boys created most prehistoric cave art, according to a book by one of the world's authorities on this type of art.
The theory contradicts the idea that adult, tribal shaman spiritual leaders and healers produced virtually all of it. 
It also explains why many of the images drawn in caves during the Pleistocene, between 10,000 and 35,000 years ago, somewhat mirror today's artwork and graffiti, largely produced by adolescent males. 
"Today, boys draw the testosterone subjects of a hot automobile, fighter jet, Jedi armour, sports, direct missile hit, etc - all of the things they associate with the adrenaline of success," says Professor R Dale Guthrie, author of The Nature of Paleolithic Art. 
"I think the full larder [of] success of the excitement and danger of killing a giant bison or auroch in the Pleistocene was the equivalent of the testosterone art today," says Guthrie, who is an emeritus professor in the Institute of Arctic Biology at the University of Alaska Fairbanks.
He says that many of the cave art images of animals are rather graphic, showing, for example, speared animals with blood pouring out of their mouths and noses. 
But hunting and animals were not the only things on the cave artists' minds.
Guthrie has also noticed that males were drawn with no defined sexual parts save for a simple line designating the penis. Few men were even represented, but the images of women in caves tell a different story. 
"Female images dominate and are nude, almost every one full-figured above and below," says Guthrie.
"Unlike the other animals, the sculpted, engraved and painted human females and female parts are sometimes done schematically, distilling and inflating the primary and secondary sex characters." 
Learning to draw
Guthrie also determines that several cave art images are incomplete, overlapping, brief and rudimentary, as though the people who created them were still learning to draw. 
This type of sketching dominates cave walls, which also display a handful of works that appear to have been drawn by well-practiced artists, who were probably adults. 
Perhaps the most convincing piece of evidence for the new theory consists of 200 handprints that were left in the caves next to the art.
These prints were produced by people who chewed ochre, held up a hand, and then spit the colorful orange-yellow spew all over the hand, leaving a wall imprint. 
Guthrie analysed the handprints and then compared the results with earlier research on male and female hands.
The hand lengths, palm widths and the finger widths and lengths mostly match hands that would have belonged to boys aged nine to 17. 
Some teen female handprints were identified in the caves, but young male prints were more common. 
Other handprints resulting unintentionally from people leaning against muddy cave walls, as well as footprints, also suggest that young boys were creating the cave art, according to Guthrie. 
Paul Martin, professor of quaternary biogeography at the University of Arizona, says he is inclined to agree with the new theory and findings.
"[Guthrie] has an extraordinary knowledge of wild animal ecology globally, and especially in the northern hemisphere," Martin says.
"In addition, he brings detailed knowledge of late Pleistocene fossils to his study of cave art. Finally, like many zoologists, especially those with children of their own, he is an astute observer of human behaviour.
"If he finds that much cave art reflects teenage or preteen preoccupations, I am prepared to believe him," he says.

This pampered pooch walks the same way as a greyhound or a labrador. But why is the US military interested?
Labradors and dachshunds appear to waddle, while greyhounds seem to march by with a fast clip.
But new research shows the basic mechanics behind dog walking is the same for all canines. 
The discovery could lead to a better understanding of health issues related to the way dogs walk, like hip problems, the researchers say.
And it could also result in improvements to four-legged, dog-like robots, which the US military is already investigating.
"The big benefit would be to show how robot dogs should walk more efficiently," says lead scientist Dr Jim Usherwood, a researcher from the Structure and Motion Laboratory at the University of London's Royal Veterinary College.
"Almost all robots require a large amount of power - much higher than an animal would use - partly because they tend to use bent legs. I show what would happen with stiff legs," Usherwood adds.
Inspired by stiff-legged mechanical toys that can walk down hills, Usherwood and his team designed several different computer models for dog walking. The researchers then compared these models with observations of actual dogs on a treadmill. 
Their simple, passive, stiff-limbed computer model best matched and explained the principles underlying dog walking. 
The findings were recently presented at the annual meeting of the  Society for Experimental Biology in the UK. 
Like controlled falling
Walking for both bipeds and quadrupeds is like controlled falling because, with each step, the individual leans forward and is 'caught' by an outstretched limb.
As a result, there is a stage when the body is high and slow, and a stage when the body is lower and faster, Usherwood explains. 
"With a four-legged animal, this has broadly been observed before, but it had not been clear why and when these motions should happen," he says.
"My passive model makes it much easier to understand when and why the body moves up and down and changes in speed." 
The model also found that walking happens on relatively stiff limbs, unlike trotting, where a dog's legs function like springs and tend to bend more. 
This is true for bipeds such as humans. But he says people put more energy into extending their legs, while dogs appear to power themselves with torque around their hips, similar to how weight is distributed on a bicycle. 
Dogs, particularly older, arthritic ones, often suffer hip problems because if any two bones within the hip region lose their normal position, the abnormal areas can grind against each other with each step. 
Over time, abnormally shaped bone can grow and inflammation sets in. Since one condition fuels the other, it becomes a vicious cycle.
Usherwood hopes his model could help to clarify how this deadly cycle begins and worsens, which eventually may lead to improved diagnosis and treatment. 
Harvard University scientists have come to similar conclusions regarding the mechanics behind dog walking.
Russell Main, a Concord Field Station researcher, believes that dog legs work like two inverted pendulums, where mechanical energy is usually recovered with each stride. 
Dr David Lee and Professor Andy Biewener, also at Harvard, have already built a robot resembling a headless dog, called BigDog, that uses similar principles. 
According to Boston Dynamics, a research group involved in the project, BigDog so far has trotted at about 5 kilometres per hour, climbed a 35&deg; slope and carried about 54 kilograms.
In the future, the US military, which is helping to fund the research, hopes to use BigDog for rescue operations and other possible fieldwork.

If your sex life isn't all smiles and fireworks, are you sick or just going through a rough patch? And what's a normal sex life anyway?
Consumers are being marketed drugs for premature ejaculation without good evidence there is a medical problem to be treated, an Australian conference heard this week.
US-based psychologist and sex therapist Dr Leonore Tiefer, of the New York University School of Medicine, told the Inaugural Conference on Disease-Mongering in Newcastle this week, that premature ejaculation is "the next sexual dysfunction" to be marketed by the pharmaceutical industry.
This concerns Tiefer because she says sexual difficulties are generally not biological problems that need medical treatment.
"There's no sickness, there's no pathology, nothing is broken," she says. 
She says when men and women are counselled about what is distressing them sexually, rapid ejaculation is of low importance.
Tiefer says the way premature ejaculation is being marketed as a condition in need of treatment has "all the hallmarks of disease mongering". 
First, she says, drug company-sponsored messages in the media have led to growing public awareness that premature ejaculation is regarded as a problem by experts who are measuring it, defining it and finding cures for it.
These messages include "help-seeking" advertisements that urge people to "ask your doctor" about solutions to the problem. 
"The disease-awareness campaign is in full force at this point," says Tiefer.
What's normal?
She says as a result people are now asking doctors what the normal speed of ejaculation is, and wondering whether they meet the normal standard.
"The answer is there is no such thing as normal," she says. "There's a range. Some people are quick, some people are slow. Most people are in the middle."
She says although there are no drugs yet specifically approved to treat premature ejaculation, doctors are treating the condition with available drugs that are known to slow down the speed of ejaculation.
"Doctors are getting a lot of medical education about the off-label uses of these drugs," she says. "There are articles published, there are conferences organised around this and there are drug company-paid people going out there and saying you can use this for this."
Tiefer says health and science journalists are also writing about premature ejaculation and the help available for it.
Poorly defined
Australian sociologist Dr Ross Morrow of the University of Sydney, who also spoke at the conference, agrees premature ejaculation is a "suspicious condition".
"To me this is a condition that is a very questionable medical category," he says, adding that the condition is "poorly defined". 
He says over the years there has been an attempt to define premature ejaculation according to the amount of time that lapsed, or the number of thrusts that occurred, before ejaculation occurred, but no agreement has ever been reached.
Morrow says the American Psychiatric Association defines it as persistent and recurrent ejaculation either before a man has intercourse, during attempts at penetration or very shortly after intercourse begins, in a way that is distressing to him or his partner.
And he says the definition relies on a clinician's judgement about whether the ejaculation is occurring too soon or not.
Norms changing over time
Morrow also says norms about when men should ejaculate during coitus are constantly changing.
For example, he says, a study in 1948 by Alfred Kinsey discovered three-quarters of men ejaculated within two minutes of coitus and regarded this as acceptable.
"He didn't think that was a dysfunction," says Morrow. "He actually thought that was a sign of men being sexually responsive."
But Morrow says during the 1960s the period of time to ejaculation considered normal by experts was extended.
He says this coincided with a belief that women's lack of sexual satisfaction during intercourse could be addressed if her male partner could take longer to ejaculate.
Morrow also says different cultures have different norms about how long men should take to ejaculate, citing the case of one Melanesian culture that considers ejaculation after 15 to 30 seconds normal.
Morrow says in Australia premature ejaculation is often mentioned in the same advertisements discussing erectile dysfunction, and is sometimes referred to under the banner of "ejaculatory problems".
He says antidepressant drugs used to delay or inhibit ejaculation are being currently used in impotency clinics in Australia and sex therapists are also treating the condition using cognitive behavioural therapy.
Female premature ejaculation?
Both Tiefer and Morrow are also concerned about the notion of "rapid orgasm", the female equivalent of premature ejaculation.
"I think it's part of a transformation of sex from a subjective experience into a concrete performance, almost like a sport with rules and goals and achievement standards," says Tiefer. 
"So you can define very clearly whether your performance is up to part and in that way products can be provided for you to achieve performance ore even exceed those expectations."

Caulobacter crescentus uses its stalk to stick to solid objects
Harmless bacteria that live in rivers produce a biological superglue stronger than any ever measured, scientists say.
Researchers reporting recently in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, say the microorganism Caulobacter crescentus sticks to surfaces three to four times more strongly than synthetic superglue.
The bacteria holds the secret for understanding how to prevent harmful bacteria from sticking to human tissue and causing disease, the researchers say.
It also may help to produce a nontoxic superglue that could be used for anything from a dental adhesive, to an industrial glue that works underwater, to a surgical glue. 
"The advantage here is that these bacteria live in water and so they bind to all sorts of surfaces in water," says team member Yves Brun, professor of biology at Indiana University. "This means that this glue is very versatile." 
Biologists including Brun regularly study C. crescentus as a biological model for understanding how other bacteria function.
Over the course of other experiments, Brun realised the holding power of the tiny critters, which attach themselves to surfaces with a stalk-like appendage.
Genes for stickiness
To zero in on how they do it, Brun and his team began genetically manipulating the bacteria to remove specific genes needed to produce the adhesive. 
Eventually, the scientists realised that variations of C. crescentus lacking the genes required to produce chains of sugar molecules at the ends of the stalks could not hold fast to surfaces. 
The scientists determined that the polysaccharide is a critical component of the adhesive.
They think that the sugar molecules are attached to super-sticky proteins, but they have yet to confirm which ones. 
They also have indirect evidence that either there are other adhesive molecules involved or that the polysaccharide is somehow modified to make it stickier, says Brun.
How strong is the glue?
The researchers did, however, confirm just how tenacious the bacteria are.
Jay Tang, an assistant professor of physics at Brown University and his team stepped in to help measure the force required to pull the bacteria off a flexible glass pipette. 
The researchers found that a single bacterium could withstand a stress of 0.11 to 2.26 micronewtons.
In other words, the amount of bacteria that fit onto an Australian 20 cent piece (or a US quarter) could withstand being pulled by a force of four to five tonnes, about the mass of an adult elephant.
The team also found enzymes that work to unglue the bacteria from a surface.
"The work by the group at Brown is exciting in its implications for better understanding natural adhesives and also in possible translation to new synthetic adhesives," says Professor Dennis Discher of the Biophysics and Polymers Lab at the University of Pennsylvania. 
According to Brun, ultimately the bacteria would not be used as a glue itself, but to produce the adhesive.
Before that can happen, the scientists have to pinpoint the genes required and devise a method for getting the bacteria to produce the glue in large quantities.

Australopithecus anamensis fossils include teeth, upper jaws, hand and foot bones, vertebral fragments, a thigh bone and fragments of skull and jaw
An international team of scientists has discovered 4.1 million year old fossils in eastern Ethiopia that fill a missing gap in human evolution. 
The teeth and bones belong to a primitive species of Australopithecus known as Australopithecus anamensis, an ape-man creature that walked on two legs. 
The Australopithecus genus is thought to be an ancestor of modern humans. Seven separate species have been named and Au. anamensis is the most primitive. 
"This new discovery closes the gap between the fully blown Australopithecines and earlier forms we call Ardipithecus," says Professor Tim White, from the University of California, Berkeley, who's team reports its find today in the journal Nature. 
"We now know where Australopithecus came from before 4 million years ago." 
The fossils were unearthed in the Middle Awash area in the Afar desert of eastern Ethiopia. 
The area, about 230 kilometres northeast of Addis Ababa, has the most continuous record of human evolution, the researchers say. 
The remains of the hominid that had a small brain, big teeth and walked on two legs, fits into the one million-year gap between the earlier Ardipithecus and Au. afarensis.
The famous fossil skeleton Lucy, which lived between 3.6 and 3.3 million years ago and was found in 1974, is an example of Au. afarensis.
"It is fair to say that some species of Ardipithecus gave rise to Australopithecus," says White.
Fossil find
The fossils from about eight individuals include the largest hominid canine found so far, the earliest known thigh bone of the species and hand and foot bones. 
The finding also extends the range of Au. anamensis in Ethiopia. Previous remains of the species were found in Kenya. 
White says the large teeth suggest the hominid could eat fibrous foods and roots, compared to earlier species of Ardipithecus that had smaller teeth, which restricted their diet.
Along with the hominid fossils, the scientists discovered hundreds of remains of pigs, birds, rodents and monkeys as well as hyenas and big cats which gave them an idea of the habitat in which they existed. 
"Here, in a single Ethiopian valley, we have nearly a mile-thick stack of superimposed sediments and 12 horizons yielding hominid fossils. These discoveries confirm the Middle Awash study area as the world's best window on human evolution," White adds.

The Mona Lisa has inspired many imitations, like this poster advertising contact lenses
Hidden behind the Mona Lisa's enigmatic smile are millions of invisible dots, research shows.
According to research presented recently at Italy's Uffizi Gallery in Florence, the Mona Lisa consists of countless of dot layers applied with a technique of microdivided brushstrokes. 
The dot research was revealed at the exhibition "The mind of Leonardo - the universal genius at work", which runs at the gallery until January 2007.
Jacques Franck, a consultant at the Armand Hammer Center for Leonardo Studies at the University of California, Los Angeles, says the technique is somewhat similar to pointillism used by the French neo-impressionists in the late 19th century. 
"Examples of this microdivision of tones exist since the ancient Romans. Leonardo took an existing techniques, but used it to the extreme, like nobody else," says Franck.
The painting technique is called 'sfumato', from the Italian word 'fumo', meaning smoke. And it produces an almost 3D effect, the result of the delicate brushwork that blends light, shadow, and contours.
Da Vinci never really explained how he was able to blend shadow and light in such an imperceptible way. 
The only reference to the sfumato technique appears in his notes on the painting.
"Light and shade should blend without lines or borders, in the manner of smoke," he wrote.
Applying science
Franck examined Leonardo's works using what he calls an "archaeological approach".
He took a close look at another da Vinci work, 'Drapery study for a seated figure', which hangs in The Louvre, and noticed that Leonardo used minute brushstrokes to produce the 3D effect of the draperies. 
"The technique is visible, as he used tempera [a type of emulsion of oil and water, often using egg]. On the contrary, in oil painting traces would have been masked by a delicate velatura or glaze," Franck says. 
Franck, an artist himself, has been copying Leonardo's works since he was eight.
And Franck backed up his microdivision theory by reconstructing the Mona Lisa's eye through six steps, represented by panels on display at the Uffizi exhibition. 
He started with a poplar panel, similar to the one Leonardo used to paint the Mona Lisa in 1503-1506. 
Franck treated the panel with gypsum and animal glue, then painted an eye with a brush, but using black chalk.
Then he applied a semi-opaque, diluted oil-based wash to soften the chalk lines and then retouched the details with microscopic brushstrokes.
He had to apply many layers until they blended together. 
According to Franck, details such as the smile and eyes contain between 30 and 40 brush strokes per millimetre. Essentially, Leonardo was working as a miniaturist would.
"He may have made one square millimetre a day. This means it might have taken Leonardo about 10 years to complete the Mona Lisa," Franck says.
Enigmatic smile
Lisa di Antonio Maria Gherardini, the Mona Lisa, has been fascinating art lovers since her portrait was completed toward the end of the life of Leonardo, who lived from 1452-1519. 
Attempts to solve the enigma around her smile, described by the 16th century artist and writer Giorgio Vasari as "more divine than human", have included theories that the noblewoman was happily pregnant, suffering from asthma, had facial paralysis or that the smile was the result of a compulsive gnashing of teeth.
Franck's theory is raising a debate among art historians.
"I find it absolutely untrue. Leonardo did use the sfumato, but his painting technique is also very firm. I have seen the Mona Lisa under a magnifying glass and really, I could not see any dot," says da Vinci scholar and UK professor of art history Martin Kemp, from the University of Oxford.
Franck argues that it is scientifically impossible to distinguish the dots with a magnifying glass. 
"Light penetrates each dot, producing reflection, diffraction, and diffusion. Thus, when you look at the painting, the surface appears homogeneous. No dot can be seen. Moreover, in my works the dots completely disappeared within three years. The same might have happened with the Mona Lisa," Franck says.
How about x-ray evidence? 
Indeed, x-ray images of Franck's copies are very similar to x-ray pictures of the master's works: they all show something similar to smoke. 
"The layers of paint are so thin that x-ray simply goes through," Franck says. 
According to the curators of the exhibition, Franck's hypothesis is "convincing". 
"It is compatible with the material evidence of the Mona Lisa as analysed by the Louvre's laboratory," they write in the exhibition catalogue.

Venus' south pole, by day and night. The left hand image is the view by day, showing sunlight reflected from the tops of clouds. The right hand image, taken using infrared sensors, shows a dynamic spiral cloud, with the darker regions corresponding to thicker cloud cover
The newly arrived Venus Express spacecraft has relayed the first view of the planet's south pole, revealing a dark vortex and an odd cloud-type structure. 
"We're already experiencing the hot, dynamic environment of Venus," says project scientist Dr Hakan Svedhem. 
Venus Express captured its first images of its host planet the day on Wednesday, the day after it slipped into orbit following a five month journey.
The European-built craft is expected to spend two Venusian days - which is more than a year on Earth - studying the planet's dense and turbulent atmosphere.
The mission will attempt to learn why a planet so similar in size and composition to Earth ended up so vastly different. 
Venus has an extremely thick and toxic atmosphere that traps heat more effectively than any other planet in the solar system. 
Its surface temperature is hotter than Mercury, which orbits closer to the Sun, and its atmospheric pressure is similar to Earth's pressure about a kilometre beneath the ocean. 
Although the new images are relatively low-quality - when the probe reaches its final orbit scientists expect more than 100 times better resolution - researchers are intrigued by the clear structures and unexpected details seen in the planet's atmosphere. 
The Sun-lit images primarily show reflected light from Venus' cloud tops, down to a height of about 65 kilometres above the planet's surface. 
The night view, which was taken using infrared sensors, shows a dynamic spiral of clouds in the lower atmosphere, similar to a structure previously seen at the planet's north pole. 
The pictures were taken from a distance of about 200,000 kilometres. 
Zooming in on Venus
Venus Express is in the process of tightening its orbit, which will eventually reach as close as 250 kilometres above the planet's surface. 
Venus Express is the first spacecraft to visit Venus since NASA's Magellan radar mapping mission of the 1990s.
The probe is equipped with seven instruments, many of which are spares from Europe's ongoing Mars Express mission and the Rosetta comet probe. 
Researchers hope to unlock the history and mechanisms of Venus' dense and toxic atmosphere. 
They want to understand how the presence of carbon dioxide, water vapour and sulfuric gases trap heat in the planet's atmosphere, similar to how a glass greenhouse warms plants on Earth.

Chernobyl surrounded by a crumbling concrete outer layer, which the international community hopes will by replaced by a sturdier steel jacket by 2012
Twenty years ago, explosions at the Chernobyl power plant sent a huge radioactive cloud into the air in the world's worst civilian nuclear accident that still affects millions of people today. 
On 26 April 1986, at 1.23 am local time, a series of explosions ripped through reactor four at the plant in the north of what is today Ukraine, near its border with Belarus.
Radiation fell across much of Europe. 
For days, the Soviet leadership refused to admit, either to its own people or to the world, what had happened less than 100 kilometres north of a major city, Kiev, and near the huge Dniepr River that crisscrossed Ukraine and provided much of its water supply. 
Only after the news blackout ended were 135,000 people evacuated from the most affected areas around the plant. 
To this day, Chernobyl fuels controversies over the use of nuclear power, attracts tourists and researchers, feeds fears of another release, continues to claim victims, and gobbles huge amounts of international funds. 
An army of some 600,000 'liquidators' - firemen, soldiers and civilians - helped to construct a concrete sarcophagus meant to contain the reactor for 20 to 30 years before a more permanent structure could be built. 
The fate awaiting these people and others exposed to radiation from the blast is one of the main controversies still surrounding the plant. 
In its latest report on the disaster released in September, the UN estimates that fewer people will eventually perish than was initially predicted. 
The report, the work of some 100 scientists from eight UN agencies, says up to 4000 will eventually die as a result of the accident, in addition to the nearly 60 people who have already died. 
Environmental groups like Greenpeace reject the findings as "whitewash", collusion "with the nuclear lobby" and "insulting for the victims". They estimate that the death toll will be in the tens of thousands. 
Psychological problems
In addition to health effects like thyroid cancer, survivors also deal with psychological problems. 
A study of more than 2000 liquidators by the Serbsky Psychiatric Institute in Moscow found that two thirds of them suffered from psychological illnesses. 
"Considering their young age at the time of the accident, all of the negative effects have not appeared yet," says Galina Rumyantseva, who led the study. 
Regions affected by the accident remain today both socially and economically devastated. 
Some 350,000 people have been evacuated from the surrounding areas in all. Some 784,320 hectares of prime agricultural land remain ruined, as do 700,000 hectares of forest. 
The UN estimates that the eventual price tag of the disaster will run to hundreds of billions of US dollars. 
Today, the sarcophagus over reactor four is cracked and crumbling, raising fears that more radiation can be released. 
Some 28 countries have pledged to chip in more than US$750 million toward the construction of a new 20,000 tonne steel case.
The cover is expected  to cost between US$1 and $2 billion dollars and is hoped to be finished by 2012. 
But it will take at least 100 years to safely get rid of dangerous fuel and debris inside the plant, says spokesperson Yulia Marusich. 
The plant, whose last reactor was shut down for good only in 2000, continues to attract attention.
Tourists come to gawk, while researchers come to observe the remarkable flourishing of flora and fauna. 
Hundreds of mostly elderly people who lived in villages around the plant have ignored government restrictions and warnings of radiation to resettle in the 30 kilometre exclusion zone around the plant, raising animals and eating fruits and berries from the radiation-soaked land. 
The final effects from the series of explosions that occurred in the early hours at a Soviet nuclear power plant in 1986 may not be known for years, scientists say. 
"We may not see anything today, but genetic modifications can appear in 20, 50 years," says Rudolf Alexakhin, director of the Agricultural Radiology Institute in Moscow.

Workers set up the dig at Visocica Hill to look for evidence of an ancient pyramid, the so-called Bosnian Pyramid of the Sun
Excavation work has started north of Sarajevo on what a Bosnian explorer says are Europe's first pyramids. 
A group of experts explored the narrow entrance of a 3.8 kilometre tunnel believed to lead to one of the two hills resembling pyramids, about 30 kilometres from the Bosnian capital. 
As residents of the nearby town of Visoko eagerly watched, digging began on one of 10 sites, 20-by-50 metres, on slopes of a hill covered by vegetation. 
"Initial observations showed that the tunnel was man-made," says geologist Nadjia Nukic after examining the initial unblocked section of the tunnel. 
Last year Semir Osmanagic, a self-styled Bosnian explorer, started initial investigations in the area, convinced the 'constructions' on Visocica and Pljesivica hills were the work of builders from an unknown civilisation. 
He says further research using satellite pictures has provided more evidence for his case.
The images show the hills cooled a lot faster than their surroundings, he says, proving the substance of the structures was less dense and therefore probably made by humans. 
"With the paucity of contrary evidence, the hills are presumed to be anthropogenic structures of potentially colossal proportions," says Bosnian geophysicist Dr Amer Smailbegovic.
The explorers, who are expected to be joined by an Egyptian archaeologist and a geologist later in the year, hope to find stone blocks, or the steps of the 'pyramids'. 
Osmanagic, who wears an Indiana Jones-like hat and clothing and says he sharpened his eye for archaeology on numerous trips around the world, says the two structures are precisely aligned with the four points of the compass. 
On the outskirts of the town, Visocica Hill, which Osmanagic refers to as the Bosnian Pyramid of the Sun, stands some 220 metres high, with a square base of more than 400 by 400 metres. 
Osmanagic says he sees astonishing similarities between the structures and Mexican pyramids dating back to about 200 AD, which also come in pairs, one believed to represent the Sun and the other the Moon. 
The excavation work, led by a recently established foundation of local archaeologists and volunteers, will last for 200 days.
The first results would be known in three weeks, Osmanagic says. 
The director of the Visoko Historic Heritage museum, Senad Hodovic, says he is no sceptic.
"The pyramids are obviously the work of man. But we need proper and serious analysis to show who built them and when." 
Hodovic says he has spent years urging authorities to support archaeological research on the plateau of the hill, which is recorded in historic annals as the site of a medieval Bosnian town. 
He says the shape and monumental size of the structures is not typical for Bosnian constructions of the Middle Ages. 
Visoko, a small town that has been slowly dying from economic decline since Bosnia's 1992-95 war, is hoping what has been dubbed the "the new wonder of the world" will offer it a brighter future.
Pyramid-mania seems to have caught everyone. 
Local souvenir shops selling oriental style coffee pots and plates now offer slippers, ceramic coin-boxes, t-shirts and brandy with pyramid logos.

Seb the German shepherd smells sheep poo for a living
A sniffer dog has been trained to tell which sheep have parasitic worms, Australian researchers show.
The dog's skills will be used to develop an electronic handheld 'sniffer' device to detect gastrointestinal nematodes in sheep.
The parasite detection initiative has the potential to save the Australian sheep industry millions of dollars a year, say agricultural scientists at Melbourne's La Trobe University.
Internal parasites are a constant headache for sheep farmers because they cause serious production losses.
They can interfere with a sheep's wool and meat growth, and make the animal weak and susceptible to other diseases. They can even kill.
Anti-parasitic drugs have been the weapon of choice for a number of years, however many parasites have become resistant to the drugs.
So the researchers tried something different.
"Scents, and the use of sniffer dogs to detect them, are used to determine the presence of a number of substances," says chief investigator Associate Professor Mark Sandeman. 
"So we set out to ascertain whether the presence of intestinal parasites in sheep could be detected by their scent."
It seems they can, with Seb the female German shepherd being trained to detect parasite-infected sheep droppings by its odour with 80-90% accuracy.
"We used [Seb] in a classic training sense; just as dogs are trained to detect drugs at airports, we trained [Seb] to detect parasites," he says.
Bags of infested poo were placed among bags of non-infested poo and Seb was trained to pick out the infested sample.
The whiff of parasites
Sandeman says it is too early to say exactly which chemicals, or groups of chemicals Seb is sniffing out.
"We don't know exactly what the dog is sniffing but we're picking up some differences in terms of chemical signatures that would suggest there are a number of different compounds that are changed between infected and uninfected sheep," he says.
The researchers are now working on developing an electronic handheld 'sniffer' device similar to those used in the food manufacturing industry. 
They are confident they will have a prototype within five years.
"We thought about training dogs to use on farms, but [there were many] technical difficulties. So instead we thought it would be better to have some small device that farmers could use," Sandeman says.
He envisages a farmer holding the sniffer device near the rear end of sheep or near poo.
Eventually, the detector might be refined using biosensor technology and sheep may be checked automatically for parasites, he says.
The Australian Sheep Industry CRC is funding the work.

Hello Mr Personality! Researchers are learning that squid have distinct character traits
Squid have personalities that appear to be passed down from parent to offspring, says an Australian researcher.
But those traits can be modified by environment, says Dr David Sinn, who will present his research at the Australasian Association for the Study of Animal Behaviour conference in Sydney this week.
Sinn, a research fellow at the University of Tasmania, observed behaviour in the southern dumpling squid (Euprymna tasmanica), which is found in waters around South Australia, Victoria and Tasmania.
In general, these squid tend to be solitary, unromantic animals with a propensity to cannibalise their neighbours and take sexual favours by force, he says.
Within that profile Sinn found some squid are shy, retiring, cautious types while others are bold, assertive and adventurous.
"It turns out some squid are bolder than others," he says.
"For example, when presented by a threatening stimulus they attack the stimulus or are ambivalent to it.
"Others are shyer, they don't inspect a threat, they back up, they flee."
Assertiveness training for squid
Previous research suggests these character traits in squid are up to 30% hereditary, he says.
But there's evidence that some squid can adapt to their environment by learning to either temper their overconfidence or shake off their shyness.
Sinn says squid and other cephalopods like octopuses and cuttlefish are relatively intelligent and, relative to body size, have brains the size of cats.
This is probably to compensate for the loss of their protective shells during evolution, he says, with more brain capacity needed to protect their vulnerable bodies from predators.
Population dynamics
Sinn says understanding the ecology and evolution of personality provides a key to understanding what drives animal populations.
He says it's unclear which personality traits confer an evolutionary edge, although it appears that having a mix of personalities is essential for a population to survive a disturbance.
"Individual behaviour is going to determine how far [an animal population] disperses, its growth rate, how well it survives and potentially how it reproduces, so all these things are driving population dynamics," he says.
"If you want to know how to predict population abundance maybe we need to know more about individual behaviours and how they're going to react to environmental change."
Squid lovers
Sinn's next project is to investigate the role of personality in the sex life of squid.
He says mating in the squid world is forceful on the part of the male but females play a role in choosing to associate with prospective mates or in attempting to rebuff unwanted advances.
He says early evidence suggests bolder females prefer bolder males while shy females are less choosy.
Sinn also intends to look at personality in lizards.

Web developers and doctors running clinical websites need to be aware of possible misuse of their online images, US doctors warn
Porn seekers are finding a new source of online images, doctors have discovered.
They're downloading images of diseased genitalia from dermatology websites, sites that were originally set up to educate doctors.
Dr Christoph Lehmann and colleagues, from Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, noticed a marked jump in queries for images of genital areas from their searchable archive of clinical photographs.
They investigated and published their results in the latest issue of the Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology.
The researchers assessed request patterns received by the site over 6 months, in terms of diagnosis, age group and anatomical site. 
Of the more than 7800 dermatological images available on the site, 5.5% involve genital regions. But 12% of queries for a specific diagnosis involved a genital area.
Also 37% of the requests for an anatomical site involved a genital region, and 12% of the 10,000 free text queries were for images of genitalia. 
In searches that specified both an age group and an anatomical site, images involving children were 48% more likely to be requested than those involving an adult. 
An analysis of the top 43 referring sites to the dermatology service revealed that 21% were pornographic or fetish sites. But these sites only accounted for 14.3% of all 141,285 referrals. 
"Developers of online clinical image libraries containing potentially sensitive health information on topics such as sexuality and anatomy must be aware of issues beyond technical and domain knowledge," the authors say.
"Anonymous misuse of collaborative archives must be anticipated, addressed and prevented to preserve their integrity and the integrity of the learning communities they support."

Neurologists say people whose dreaming spills over into wakefulness may be prone to near-death experiences
The brain's tendency to occasionally blur the line between sleep and wakefulness may help explain the phenomenon of near-death experience, preliminary research suggests. 
It's been an open question as to why some people see bright light, feel detached from their bodies or have other extraordinary sensations when they are close to dying or believe they might die. 
Some people view these so-called near-death experiences as evidence of life after death, and many neurologists have considered the phenomenon too complex for scientific study. 
But the new research, published in the journal Neurology, implicates the blending of sleep and wake states as a biological cause. 
Researchers found that adults who say they've had such an experience are also likely to have a history of what's called REM intrusion, where aspects of the dream state of sleep spill over into wakefulness. 
People may, for example, feel paralysed when they first wake up, or have visual or auditory hallucinations as they fall asleep or awaken. 
Of the 55 study participants who've had a near-death experience, 60% have also experienced REM intrusion at some point in their lives. That compares with 24% of 55 adults in a comparison group. 
Arousing the body
The findings suggest that the brain's arousal system predisposes some people to both REM intrusion and near-death experience, according to the study authors, led by Dr Kevin Nelson, a neurologist at the University of Kentucky in Lexington. 
This arousal system, Nelson says, regulates not only REM sleep, but also attention and alertness during waking hours, including during dangerous situations. 
And many of the features of REM intrusions, he says, parallel those of near-death experience. 
During REM sleep, visual centres in the brain are highly active, while the limb muscles are temporarily paralysed.
So REM intrusion during peril could promote the visions of light and sensation of "being dead" that people often have during a near-death experience, according to Nelson. 
Not the whole story
Other evidence supports a role for REM intrusion in near-death experiences, he says.
One important fact, Nelson notes, is that stimulation of the vagus nerve, which connects the brain stem to the heart, lungs and intestines, triggers REM intrusion. And heightened activity in this nerve is sure to be part of the body's "fight-or-flight" response to danger. 
Still, Nelson says he doesn't think REM intrusion will turn out to be the "whole explanation" for near-death experience, and the findings shouldn't detract from the meaning people have taken from their experiences. 
"My work is spiritually neutral," Nelson says, noting the research can only look at how the brain contributes to near-death experience, and not why the phenomenon occurs. 
"The 'why' can't be addressed by scientific inquiry," he says.

Grooming is important to cattle but would they use a hairbrush if they had hands?
Beef cattle use tools to keep their coats healthy, says an Australian researcher, suggesting they are more than all brawn and no brains.
Animal behaviour scientist Bob Kilgour, who works for the New South Wales Department of Primary Industries, observed the grooming behaviour of various breeds of beef cattle at pasture on a number of properties over several days.
He found they spend about 3% of their day grooming and preening themselves, even in the absence of parasites.
They mainly use their tongues and hind hooves to groom the rear end of their bodies, Kilgour says.
But they also use inanimate objects like trees, branches, fence posts and stumps to get at areas they can't reach, he says.
"They'll walk up to fallen tree limbs which have protruding branches and groom around their eyes," he says.
"So they're making very finely controlled motor movements to groom around sensitive parts of their body."
Kilgour will tell the Australasian Association for the Study of Animal Behaviour conference in Sydney this week that this deliberate choice of different kinds of objects suggests they are being used as tools.
He says this is a bold suggestion because the definition of tool use conventionally relies on an ability to hold and manipulate objects.
"These are animals that can't pick things up and manipulate them, but nonetheless they are making decisions about what they are going to use to groom their bodies," he says.
"I'm postulating this could redefine our idea of tool use.
"It's difficult to relate this to intelligence but I'd just like to say there's a lot more going on up there than we really know about."
Comparisons with similar species
Kilgour compared grooming behaviour of beef cattle with undomesticated, but related, species including bison, water buffalo, banteng and eland.
He found similar grooming patterns.
This suggests an evolutionary purpose for grooming, Kilgour says. For example, maintaining the integrity of their coat may protect against invasion by parasites, bacteria or grass seeds.
"If you find this behaviour occurs in closely related species you can say this confers some survival advantage on animals, therefore it's a necessary behaviour," he says.
"So in production systems, like feedlots, where we try to stop animals grooming because we don't want to push the fence posts over, we may be thwarting what is a valuable natural behaviour."
He says attempts to prevent grooming may therefore be misguided and a denial of the animal's right to express normal behaviour, one of the central elements of animal welfare.

This new type of brain-machine interface could replace joysticks in online gaming or be used as a communication tool for pople who cannot speak or sign
A computerised keyboard that translates electrical impulses from brainwave signals into letters and words could be available in the next five years, German researchers say.
In the short term, the technology will allow its developers, from the Fraunhofer Institute and the Charit&eacute; University Hospital in Berlin to watch a brain function in real time. 
But in the long term, such a brain-machine interface could replace the joystick in electronic gaming or serve as a communication tool for people unable to speak or sign. 
"We are dreaming of something like a baseball cap with electrodes in the cap that can measure the brainwaves," says one of the scientists behind the project Professor Klaus-Robert M&uuml;ller of the Fraunhofer Institute. 
"People could just put on the cap and have a wireless connection from these electrodes to a computer and they can play video games." 
Measuring brainwaves
That vision, says M&uuml;ller, will require advances in electrode technology that allow the tiny, metal sensors to pick up electric signals from brainwave activity without making contact with the skin. 
For now, M&uuml;ller and his colleagues are still somewhat constrained by the conventional electrode cap, which looks like a swimmer's cap embedded with 64 or 128 contact points and a web of wires leading to a computer. 
Each electrode embedded in the cap must be smeared with a conductive gel before the cap is fitted properly to a person's head, a process that can take 30 minutes to an hour. 
M&uuml;ller and his team's technology involves special software. 
Once the electrode cap is in place, the person must calibrate the computer to their individual brainwaves. 
Whereas other research projects may require a person to spend 100 hours practising with the machine before calibration is finalised, the Fraunhofer system takes only 5 minutes. 
"The Berlin group is very strong and focused on the computer learning the pattern," says Robert Leeb, a brain-computer interface researcher at Graz University of Technology in Austria. 
Leeb works in a team developing a machine that propels a person through a virtual environment based on brain signals. 
Imagine moving your hand
During calibration with the Berlin group's technology, the person imagines moving his left or right hand.
The signals picked up by the electrodes are processed in a specially written computer program that filters out signals from thoughts not related to moving the object and homes in on the brain activity responsible for the imagination of movements. 
Once the person is in sync with the computer, he can imagine moving his hands or feet or rotating an object to trigger an action on the screen. 
"In the brain, there is one specific area on the cortex that is active during left hand motor imagery and another one that is active during right hand motor imagery," says team member Dr Benjamin Blankertz. 
"These mental tasks are discriminated by their brain activity patterns and can thus be used for brain-computer interface control."
Additional computer screens present various data indicating brain activity, which the team monitors closely. 
The researchers' goal is to capture and display many more psychological measures, such as those that reveal cognitive workload, attention, stress and vigilance. 
The work could open the door on a wealth of information about how the brain functions, not to mention improve how it controls images on-screen with just a thought, the researchers say.

Banning the fluoroquinolone class of antibiotics in animal feed means humans are more likely to respond to these powerful antibiotics if they need them
Reducing the use of antibiotics in food-producing animals leads to less drug resistance in humans, an Australian study confirms for the first time.
Researchers examined samples from 585 people with gastroenteritis due to the nation's most common bacterial cause of foodborne disease, Campylobacter jejuni.
Tests identified a low level of resistance to the fluoroquinolone group of antibiotics, which Australia has banned in food-producing animals like poultry.
One investigator, senior lecturer in epidemiology at the Australia National University in Canberrra, Dr Mahomed Patel, says flouroquinolones are powerful, newer generation antibiotics that should be reserved for "pretty severe infections in humans".
The study found that only 2% of the Australian-acquired campylobacter infections were resistant to ciprofloxacin, a type of flouroquinolone. 
In countries that allow fluoroquinolones to be used in animals, ciprofloxacin resistant strains are up to 15 times more common in humans, studies show.
Drug resistance could make these infections hard to treat, lengthen bouts of diarrhoea and increase risk of serious or fatal illness.
"The very low level of ciprofloxacin resistance in C. jejuni isolates likely reflects the success of Australia's policy of restricting use of fluoroquinolones in food-producing animals," researchers say in a paper to be published in the journal Clinical Infectious Diseases.
Those tested were from Queensland, South Australia, Victoria, Tasmania and Western Australia, states that require reporting of patients infected with the bacteria, and were hospitalised with gastroenteritis or remained in the community.
Patel says it is unknown why ciprofloxacin resistance ranged from 0% among Tasmanian patients to 8% in infected Victorians.
But as expected, there were much higher rates of resistance to other antibiotics among Australian-acquired infections, especially those more commonly used by people in the community.
International evidence
He says this is the first Australian study to support evidence seen in countries such as Sweden and Norway that banning use in animals means low rates of fluoroquinolone-resistant campylobacter infections in humans. 
"It confirms Australia has remained relatively free of problems because we've never used these antibiotics in animals; avoiding animal use has prevented resistance in humans," Patel says.
Those infected outside Australia were more likely to have a resistant strain, especially if they had travelled to Asia. 
Reasons could include contact with an infected person or eating meat from an animal with the resistant bacteria, Patel says.
In Australia causes could include medical treatment with the antibiotics, eating imported contaminated food or acquiring resistance in hospital.

The newly discovered dinosaur looked like T-rex, pictured here, but had a longer, narrower skull and shorter, blade-like teeth
Remains of an enormous species of carnivorous dinosaur, longer than all other previously identified meat-eating dinos, have been found in Argentina, scientists say.
Researchers announced that the newly discovered meat muncher Mapusaurus roseae belongs to a group of gigantic carnivorous dinosaurs called carcharodontosaurids.
This group includes Giganotosaurus, the largest meat-eating dinosaur to ever walk the Earth. 
The discovery of the new dinosaur in western Patagoniais is published in the latest issue of the journal Geodiversitas. 
Palaeontologists say Mapusaurus was more than 12 metres long and had a shinbone that was longer than that of Giganotosaurus.
But the current record-holder retains its "largest" title because Giganotosaurus would have been wider and heavier than Mapusaurus. 
Nevertheless, the new dinosaur would have been an intimidating creature, especially when it was part of a group.
Hundreds of bones
Researchers found hundreds of Mapusaurus bones dating to 100 million years together in a pack that would have included 5 metre long juveniles and adults which were more than 12 metres long. 
"This is arguably the nastiest thing ever found, as it is the first pack found for giant meat-eating dinosaurs," says 'Dino' Don Lessem, who participated in the dig and helped to fund it.
Lessem, a dinosaur expert who was a consultant on the film Jurassic Park, says that Mapusaurus would have lived at the same time as the largest animal that ever lived, Argentinosaurus, which was a 38 metre long plant-eating dinosaur. 
"In a pack, [Mapusaurus] could take down this herbivore despite its weight - 10 times [more than] even this largest of meat eaters," he says. 
Like T-rex
Philip Currie, who also worked on the excavation and is a professor of biological sciences at the University of Alberta, says the new dinosaur somewhat resembled Tyrannosaurus rex. 
"Mapusaurus looked something like T. rex but had a longer, narrower skull," Currie explains.
"Its teeth were shorter and more blade-like. The teeth and long skull were better adapted to biting big chunks of meat out of sauropod dinosaurs. T. rex, on the other hand, had longer, thicker teeth for biting through the bones of its prey." 
The palaeontologists therefore think the newly discovered carnivore both scavenged and hunted for meat. 
Hunting in packs
Dr Rodolfo Coria, who also worked on the excavation and is a palaeontologist at the Carmen Funes Museum in Argentina, says that Mapusaurus may have been unique among carnivores in that it seemed to live a more social life as it was found in a pack.
T. rex and virtually all other carnivorous dinosaurs usually are solitary specimens, suggesting they mostly lived and hunted alone. 
Coria says it is possible the big meat eaters evolved different habits for each species, and Mapusaurus simply may have been more social. The pack even appears to have passed away together in a mass die-off. 
Dr Michael Ryan, curator and head of vertebrate palaeontology at the Cleveland Museum of Natural History, examined the dinosaur bones on a recent trip to Patagonia. He agrees with the other palaeontologists. 
"This new discovery helps us better understand the diversity of giant carnivorous dinosaurs," says Ryan.
"Even more interesting is the fact that the find contains the remains of multiple individuals of different sizes and ages."

The new ground-based telescope will give images 10 times crisper than the Hubble Space Telescope
Australian astronomers have joined a consortium building the world's largest telescope, which from 2015 will help scientists understand the evolution of the universe.
The Australian National University has become equal partners with eight US institutions to design the US$500 million (A$671 million) optical and infrared Giant Magellan Telescope.
The new telescope is to be built in Chile and will consist of six mirrors surrounding a central mirror, with each mirror 8.4 metres across.
At an overall diameter of 21 metres, the new telescope will be the first of a generation of so-called Extremely Large Telescopes designed to probe the depths of the universe.
"The largest telescopes that astronomers have access to right now have diameters between 8 and 10 metres," says Professor Penny Sackett, director of the university's Research School of Astronomy and Astrophysics, based at Mount Stromlo in Canberra. 
"Extremely Large Telescopes have diameters of 20 to 30 to 50 metres."
Sackett says the light-gathering power increases with the square of the diameter of a telescope.
"When you go from an 8 metre to a 24 metre [telescope] you've actually increased your light-gathering power by a factor of nine not by a factor of three."
Light from distant stars
She says the telescope's enormous diameter will allow it to detect light from the most distant stars in the universe.
The light has taken so long to reach Earth it is almost the age of the universe which means it gives astronomers a picture of the universe right after it was born, says Sackett.
She says the Giant Magellan Telescope will be the first telescope to directly detect light from planets that are just forming around other stars.
The telescope will also allow astronomers to study dark matter and dark energy, which influence the geometry of the universe.
"Dark matter and dark energy are the forces that tug and pull on the fabric of space-time. They determine how the universe evolves over time," she says.
Clear focus
Sackett says the telescope will have "adaptive optics", new technology that undoes the blurring effects of the Earth's atmosphere. 
"The mirrors move very quickly to put the light rays back in the right place by bouncing them at slightly different angles," she says.
"The Giant Magellan Telescope should be able to take pictures that are 10 times crisper, 10 times sharper, 10 times more detailed that the Hubble Space Telescope."
Partnership in the new telescope will give Australian astronomers access to an Extremely Large Telescope, which, according to the decadal plan for astronomy, is one of the two items Australian astronomers say are the most important to their future a decade from now.
Sackett says that Australian industries and academic institutions could also benefit from contracts to design and build instruments for the new telescope.
Other members of the consortium are the Carnegie Institution of Washington, Harvard University, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, University of Arizona, University of Michigan, Smithsonian Institution , University of Texas at Austin and Texas A&M University.

When black holes collide, they spiral towards each other then shed vast amounts of energy as space-ripping gravity waves
Powerful ripples that rend the fabric of space as black holes collide have been simulated for the first time by a supercomputer, finally giving astronomers something specific to watch for with new gravity wave telescopes. 
Black holes, collapsed stars tens to billions of times more massive than the Sun, are believed to merge fairly often in the cosmos, as they get trapped by each other's gravity. 
When it happens, they spiral towards each other and shed up to 40% of their energy in the form of powerful, space-torturing gravity waves, according to the new simulation. 
These waves propagate through the universe and researchers say the waves ought to be detectable with the right equipment.
"For years we didn't know what to expect," says Dr Joan Centrella, chief of the Gravitational Astrophysics Laboratory at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Maryland. 
The researchers used the world's fourth-fastest computer, NASA's Columbia supercomputer, to crunch the numbers in some of Einstein's toughest equations regarding black holes.
They've come up with a basic gravity wave signature of a black hole merging process from start to finish. 
"Now we have Einstein's prediction," she says. "This is a conceptualisation that we didn't have until now." 
Computer power
The new gravity wave simulation is the culmination of three decades of research that, until recently, required more computer power than was available.
The results are being published in the journals Physical Review Letters and Physical Review D. 
"For a long time they'd just crash and burn," she says of earlier computerised attempts to run Einstein's equations on the theory of general relativity. 
In the end, it took a fifth of Columbia's parallel computer processors about 80 hours to crunch the complex 90-year-old equations.
Added up processor-by-processor, the calculations took more than 18 years of processor time, Centrella says. 
The researchers were pleased to discover one of their results.
Regardless of the different possible orbits and speeds two black holes have when they begin to merge, they end up producing the same signature wave patterns as they near the end of their collision, Centrella says.
That should make them pretty easy to identify. 
The next step will be to detect some actual gravity waves and see if they match the simulation. That will be, in effect, one tremendous test of Einstein's work on black hole theory, says Centrella. It will also mark the genuine birth of a whole new field of astronomy.
"Black holes play a key role in gravitational wave astronomy," says astronomer Professor Peter Saulson of Syracuse University in New York. "They will be the primary source of gravity waves." 
Searching for gravity waves
Saulson works on the Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory (LIGO) in Hanford, Washington, which started searching the skies for gravity waves late last year. 
LIGO, with its 4 kilometre-wide antenna, ought to be able to detect gravity waves from the collisions of smaller black holes, says Saulson. 
As for the far larger supermassive black holes found at the centres of galaxies, their gravity waves will require a space-borne observatory that can detect much lower frequency gravity waves, he says. 
That's the goal of NASA's Laser Interferometer Space Antenna, which will have three spacecraft 3 million miles apart and linked by lasers, due to be launched in 2015.

Huge underground Antarctic lakes, like Lake Vostok pictured here, are connected by fast-flowing underground rivers that stretch for hundreds of kilometres
Scientists have found huge, powerful rivers that may connect subglacial lakes deep under the Antarctic ice.
UK researchers who discovered the plumbing system that moves water hundreds of kilometres say it challenges the notion that the lakes under the Antarctic ice evolved independently and could support ancient life. 
"Previously, it was thought water moves underneath the ice by very slow seepage," says Professor Duncan Wingham of University College London (UCL) who headed the research team. 
"But this new data shows that, every so often, the lakes beneath the ice pop off like champagne corks, releasing floods that travel very long distances." 
Scientists had plans to drill through the ice to take samples from the lakes but were worried about contaminating them with new microbes. 
"We had thought of these lakes as isolated biological laboratories. Now we are going to have to think again," Wingham says.
The research, reported today in the journal Nature, also means that water from the Antarctic lakes, which were first discovered in the 1960s, could have flowed into the ocean in the past and could do so again. 
About 150 subglacial lakes have been discovered in Antarctica but researchers believe there could be thousands. 
Lake Vostok, at 15-20 million years old, is thought to be the oldest.
Looking at satellite images
Scientists from UCL and the UK's Natural Environment Research Council Centre for Polar Observation and Modelling found the rivers by examining changes in measurements taken by the European Space Agency ERS-2 satellite of a region in East Antarctica known as the Dome Concordia. 
They noticed that the ice surface was 3 metres lower over one subglacial lake but it bulged by 1 metre at two other subglacial lakes about 290 kilometres away.
They suspect these changes show a flow of water from one subglacial lake to the others and calculate 1.8 cubic kilometres of water would have moved over 16 months.
"The lakes are like a set of beads on a string, where the lakes are the beads connected by a string or river of water," says Wingham. 
The scientists believe when the pressure in one of the lakes increases, a flood fills the next bead down the string.
But they do not know whether the flow of water that melts ice causes a chain reaction down the string.
A mere drop
Iceland has underground lakes that fill quickly and flush out, says Canadian researcher Professor Garry Clarke, from the University of British Columbia.
But Clarke says, in the same issue of Nature, they discharge water 100 times faster than in Antarctica. 
"The actual discharge [in Antarctica] was hardly catastrophic," he writes.
And the Antarctic outflow is "miniscule" compared with the megafloods of the last Ice Age.
Clarke writes how outflows from glacial Lake Missoula in what is now North America was 200,000 times more powerful than the UK researchers found in Antarctica.

Young children are being medicated for an illness that some psychiatrists say doesn't exist
Children as young as two years old are being inappropriately diagnosed and medicated for bipolar disorder, says a UK psychiatrist.
Professor David Healy of Cardiff University told the Inaugural Conference on Disease-Mongering recently in Newcastle, Australia, that increasing numbers of children are being treated for the condition with drugs that carry serious side-effects, without evidence the condition exists in that age group.
Healy says bipolar disorder is a condition in which someone's mood swings between highs and lows and in its most serious form this can lead to acts of suicide.
He says until recently most people believed the illness only affects older teenagers or adults but the diagnosis is now being applied to young children, particularly in the US.
He says children as young as two who are "tricky to handle, overactive or difficult in some way" are being diagnosed with bipolar disorder.
And he says they are increasingly prescribed drugs known as mood stabilisers, which are used to treat the condition in adults and have serious side-effects.
He says American Psychiatric Association (APA) diagnostic guidelines specify that periods of highs and lows should last for weeks at a time at least.
But he says children being diagnosed as having bipolar disorder have moods that go up and down during the course of a day.
"Every kid's mood goes up and down during the course of the day," he says.
Healy says advocates of using the diagnosis on children say the APA guidelines should be changed.
"The response from most of the rest of the world is that the Americans have gone hysterical."
Expanding treatment
Healy believes that the diagnosis of children with bipolar disorder is part of a general trend towards increasing the number of people treated with mood stabilisers, which he says have risks that are downplayed and benefits that are overplayed.
He says while a very small percentage of people have the serious form of bipolar disorder that might warrant medication, recently people with relatively mild mood swings have been treated, and this is now including children.
Healy says this spread of diagnosis is reflected in the increasing number of books on bipolar disorder aimed at clinicians, parents and children.
What he describes as a "watershed" book called The Bipolar Child: The Definitive and Reassuring Guide to Childhood's Most Misunderstood Disorder sold 70,000 hardback copies in its first six months, indicating huge support for the diagnosis, he says.
"[And books for children] look for all the world like versions Little Red Riding Hood or Cinderella or whatever," he says.
"They come in the same pastel colours, they show scenes of a kid who was getting into trouble and then being helped out by a kindly doctor who explains they've got a chemical imbalance and that medication will help."
Healy is paid by the pharmaceutical company AstraZeneca to give talks on mental illness.
Australian psychiatrists also concerned
Chairperson of the Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists' Faculty of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Dr Phill Brock, is also concerned about children being inappropriately diagnosed with bipolar.
"We do not endorse that diagnosis in children," he says.
Brock runs the inpatient service of the Women's and Children's Hospital in Adelaide and says he is aware the diagnosis is being made, both by GPs and psychiatrists.
"We would contend that because of the developmental context we're not able to say categorically that this is an illness that can be applied to children."
He says he is aware of advocates for diagnosing bipolar in children and found it alarming when a US organisation approached the faculty he represents 18 months ago to set up a support group for infants and children with bipolar disorder.
Healy says while a child might be hard to handle because they've moved house or school, because they've been bullied at day-care or because their parents aren't getting on it is "easier to locate to the problem in the child".
Brock is similarly concerned.
"We know that children and teenagers frequently have changes in mood. That's part of growing up," he says.
For more information on bipolar disorder, including fact sheets and referrals, see beyondblue, Australia's national depression initiative.

